Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
ya idaṃ paramaṃ guhyaṃ madbhakteṣvabhidhāsyati .
bhaktiṃ mayi parāṃ kṛtvā māmevaiṣyatyasaṃśayaḥ

Word Meanings:
यः - who
इमम् - this
परमम् - supreme
गुह्यम् - secret
मद्भक्तेषु - in My devotees
अभिधास्यति - shall declare
भक्तिम् - devotion
मयि - in Me
पराम् - supreme
कृत्वा - having done
माम् - to Me
एव - even
एष्यति - shall come
असंशयः - doubtless.

Life Application:
He who teaches this supreme secret to My devotees, offering supreme devotion to Me, shall doubtlessly come to Me.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He who, with supreme devotion to Me, teaches this supreme secret to My devotees, shall doubtless come to Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He who with supreme devotion to Me will teach this supreme secret to My devotees, shall doubtlessly come to Me.

यः who? इमम् this? परमम् supreme? गुह्यम् secret? मद्भक्तेषु in My devotees? अभिधास्यति shall declare? भक्तिम् devotion? मयि in Me? पराम् supreme? कृत्वा having done? माम् to Me? एव even? एष्यति shall come? असंशयः doubtless.Commentary This supreme secret The teachings of the Gita as taught above in the form of a dialogue between Lord Krishna and Arjuna. Why is it called a supreme secret Because it helps one to attain immortality or freedom from the whell of birth and death.He alone? who has devotion? is alified to receive the teachings of the Gita.Teach with the faith that he is thus doing service to the Lord? the Supreme Teacher.Doubtless may also mean freedom from doubts.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
But he who teaches this great secret to My devotees, his is the highest devotion, and verily he shall come unto Me.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Lord Krishna praises the teacher who imparts this knowledge in this verse. The teacher who can correctly explain the knowledge taught in the Gita and inspire the listeners to follow Krishna's way of life is indeed the best preceptor. Destructing vices, whether internal or external, is the primary principle of Lord Krishna. To propagate a culture built on such a powerful principle, mere scholarship is not enough; love and devotion are essential. If a student understands even a small part of this knowledge and culture, but makes no effort to spread it, it means he lacks dynamic intellect and inspiration. But the person who is capable of teaching the principles of the Gita is welcomed here, and he is promised the highest reward: 'he shall, without doubt, come to Me.'

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Whosoever shall declare this highest  secret to My devotees, he, cultivating an utmost devotion towards Me, and not entertaining any doubt, shall reach Me.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who proclaims among My devotees this supreme mystery, shall come to Me, aciring supreme devotion towards Me. There is no doubt about this.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
He who, entertaining supreme devotion to Me, will speak of this highest secret, to My devotees will without doubt reach Me alone.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He who, with supreme devotion to Me, teaches this supreme secret to My devotees, is performing the highest service. By doing so, he will undoubtedly attain Me. Teaching the truth of the Gita is an act of love toward the supreme Teacher, and it leads directly to liberation.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He who with supreme devotion to Me teaches this supreme secret to My devotees, shall doubtless come to Me. Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains the glory of teaching the Gita: 1. Teaching this supreme secret (ya idaṃ paramaṃ guhyaṃ... abhidhāsyati): Imparting the words and meanings of the Gita to the faithful. By doing so, the teacher acts as an instrument of the Lord to deliver souls from ignorance. 2. With supreme devotion to Me (bhaktiṃ mayi परां kṛtvā): The teacher must do this not for fame, wealth, or prestige, but as a pure act of service and devotion to the Lord, believing that this is the best way to please Him. 3. Shall doubtless come to Me (māmevaiṣyatyasaṃśayaḥ): Such a selfless teacher is guaranteed to attain union with the Lord. The Lord takes full charge of the spiritual progress of one who spreads His teachings.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Whose expounds or elucidates this supreme mystery to My devotees, he, aciring supreme devotion towards Me, will reach Me only. There is no doubt about this.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.68–18.72 jointly): Ya idam etc. upto Dhananjaya. The very act of explaining this among My devotees is itself an act of cultivating devotion towards Me.  Whosoever shall declare etc :  Whosoever directs the mind [of the devotees] by face to face method, following the best procedure prescribed in the scriptures; i.e., he who shall impart  [this knowledge] - he becomes one with Me.  This is an injunction  [concerning the result]  and not a sentence of praise.  Likewise is  [the case] in other places also.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yah, he who; abhi-dhasyati, will speak of, i.e., will present with the help of the text and its meaning, as I have done to you; imam, this; paramam, highest-that which has Liberation as its purpose; guhyam, secret, as spoken of above-(i.e.) the text in the form of a conversation between Kesava and Arjuna; madbhaktesu, to My devotees-. How will present? This is being stated: Krtva, entertaining; param, supreme; bhaktim, devotion; mayi, to Me, i.e., entertainting an idea thus-'A service is being rendered by me to the Lord who is the supreme Teacher'-. Tho him comes this result: esyati, he will reach; mam, Me; eva, alone. He is certainly freed. No doubt should be entertained in this regard.
By the repetition of (the word) bhakti (devotion) [In the word madbhaktesu.], it is understood that one becomes fit for being taught (this) Scripture by virtue of devotion alone to Him. 
Besides,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Lord declares the reward for teaching those who are devoid of these faults and are My devotees: 'ya idam...'. He who teaches this to My devotees shall indeed come to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Having described the rule of transmission, the Lord states the fruit for its teacher: 'ya idam...'. The teacher of this dialogue, which is the means to achieve the highest human goal, by establishing it among My devotees out of love for Me, shall certainly reach Me. The repetition of devotion suggests that even if one lacks other qualifications, mere devotion makes one a fit recipient.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The Lord states the fruit of teaching this scripture to those who are free from these faults and are My devotees: 'ya iti...'. He who speaks (explains) this supreme secret to My devotees performs supreme devotion to Me. Consequently, being free from doubt, he surely attains Me.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having stated the rule of transmission, the Lord describes the fruit of the teacher: 'ya iti...'. He who teaches this dialogue between Keshava and Arjuna, which leads to liberation, by explaining the text and its meaning to My devotees, does so with the attitude of rendering service to the supreme Teacher. He shall certainly attain Me. The repetition of devotion highlights that devotion alone makes one eligible to teach or learn.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The Lord states the necessity of teaching this to qualified recipients and the fruit thereof. By using 'bhakteṣu' (devotees), the defects like lack of austerity are ruled out. He who explains this supreme secret to My devotees performs the highest act of worship which generates supreme devotion. He will reach Me alone; there is no doubt about this.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Having prohibited teaching to the unqualified, the Lord describes the fruit of teaching this to My devotees: 'ya idam...'. He who teaches this supreme secret to My devotees, who are free from the mentioned defects and endowed with good qualities, shall perform supreme devotion to Me. Both the listener and the speaker will become free from doubt and certainly attain Me.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Having explained the rule of transmission, the Lord describes the fruit of the teacher: 'ya idam...'. Even if one initially teaches My devotees without full devotion but for worship or respect, through that merit, he will develop non-dual devotion to Me, the supreme Self, and ultimately attain liberation. There is no doubt about this. If even those who call out 'Narayana' without devotion (like Ajamila) attain a good state, how much more so for one who explains this entire scripture of supreme secret to My devotees!

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
For one who explains this supreme secret to the devotees, pure devotional service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.

 Generally it is advised that Bhagavad-gītā be discussed amongst the devotees only, for those who are not devotees will understand neither Kṛṣṇa nor Bhagavad-gītā . Those who do not accept Kṛṣṇa as He is and Bhagavad-gītā as it is should not try to explain Bhagavad-gītā whimsically and become offenders. Bhagavad-gītā should be explained to persons who are ready to accept Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is a subject matter for the devotees only and not for philosophical speculators. Anyone, however, who tries sincerely to present Bhagavad-gītā as it is will advance in devotional activities and reach the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such pure devotion, he is sure to go back home, back to Godhead.