Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sarvendriyaguṇābhāsaṃ sarvendriyavivarjitam .
asaktaṃ sarvabhṛccaiva nirguṇaṃ guṇabhoktṛ ca

Word Meanings:
सर्वेन्द्रियगुणाभासम् - shining by the functions
सर्वेन्द्रयविवर्जितम् - without the senses
असक्तम् - unattached
सर्वभृत् - supporting all
च - and
एव - even
निर्गुणम् - devoid of qualities
गुणभोक्तृ - experiencer of qualities
च - and.

Life Application:
Understand God as shining through all sense functions yet free from senses, unattached yet supporting all, beyond modes.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He appears to shine through the qualities (functions) of all the senses, yet (in reality) He is devoid of all senses; though unattached and devoid of qualities, He is the supporter of all and the experiencer of the qualities.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Shining by the functions of all the senses, yet without the senses; unattached, yet supporting all; devoid of alities, yet their experiencer.

सर्वेन्द्रियगुणाभासम् shining by the functions of all senses? सर्वेन्द्रयविवर्जितम् (yet) without the senses? असक्तम् unattached? सर्वभृत् (yet) supporting all? च and? एव even? निर्गुणम् devoid of alities? गुणभोक्तृ (yet) experiencer of the alities? च and.Commentary Brahman sees without eyes? hears without ears? smells without nose? eats without mouth? feels without skin? grasps without hands? walks without feet. He is the unseen seer? the unheard hearer? the unthought thinker. Other than Him there is no seer? no hearer? no thinker. He is the Self? the Inner Ruler? the Immortal. (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad III.7.23) He is free from the,alities of Nature and yet He is the enjoyer of the alities.All the senses The five organs of knowledge and the five organs of action? the inner senses? mind and intellect come under the term all the senses. The organs of action and those of knowledge perform their functions in conjunction with the mind and the intellect. They cannot function independently. Therefore? the mind and the intellect are included in the term all the senses.Brahman is transcendental and unmanifest? but It manifests Itself through the limiting adjuncts of the extrnal and the internal senses. As It is destitute of the senses It is unattached and yet It supports all. It is the support or substratum of everything. It is destitute of the alities of Nature and yet It is the enjoyer of those alities. Brahman is really mysterious.This verse is taken from the Svetasvataropanishad 3.17.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Beyond the senses, It yet shines through every sense perception. Bound to nothing, It yet sustains everything. Unaffected by the Qualities, It still enjoys them all.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
One method of pointing to the indefinable Supreme Brahman as the Self is to indicate It in the language of paradox. When the intellect forms a concept about It upon hearing one statement, the next statement refutes that concept. In this way, it is natural for the intellect to become free of conceptualizations and remain established in the experience of its own divisionless (nirvikalpa) nature. This language of paradox is a characteristic feature of spiritual texts. However, those who study the scriptures superficially, without understanding the secret of the method of scriptural instruction, cite such verses to justify their disbelief or atheism. This verse is taken from the Upanishad.

It is only due to the association with the Self-Consciousness that all the senses perform their respective functions. But it appears as if the Self, conditioned by them, acts and possesses these senses. However, upon analysis, it is known that the senses are material and perishable, whereas the Self, which manifests in them and provides them with consciousness, is eternal and changeless. In brief, from the standpoint of the limiting adjuncts (upadhis), the Self appears to be their supporter, but in Its own true nature, It is devoid of all senses (sarvendriya-vivarjita).

Electricity is neither the light of the bulb nor the heat of the heater, yet manifesting in these appliances, electricity alone appears in the form of light and heat.

'It is unattached, yet supporting all' — It is not easy for beginning students to understand Brahman as an unattached supporter. Nevertheless, the great Acharyas of our country have tried to explain this through illustrations and analogies. No single wave is the entire ocean; even all the waves put together do not constitute the ocean. We cannot say that the ocean is attached to those waves, because it is their very nature. Devoid of attachment, there is none other than the ocean that supports all of them. Cotton is in all garments, but garments are not cotton. Yet, cotton alone is the supporter of the garment. Similarly, this world of diversity is not the conscious Brahman, but Brahman alone is the supporter of all (sarvabhrit).

'It is without qualities (nirguna), yet the enjoyer of qualities' — The human mind always functions under the influence of the three qualities: Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. The Self always illumines the influences of these three qualities. Being free from the attributes of the illumined object, the Self is devoid of qualities. But only a conscious mind can experience these qualities; therefore, it is said here that the Self, though itself devoid of qualities, is also the enjoyer of qualities through the limiting adjuncts of the mind. 

Thus, in this verse, the Self is indicated from both the conditioned (sopadhika) and the unconditioned (nirupadhika) points of view. Not only that, but the Self manifested in an individual limiting adjunct is indeed situated everywhere in all living beings.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
It causes all the sense-alities to shine;  [yet]  It is without any sense-organ;  It is unattached, yet all-supporting;  It is free from the Strands, yet enjoys the Strands.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Shining by the functions of the senses, and yet devoid of the senses, detached and yet supporting all, devoid of Gunas and yet experiencing the Gunas;

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Shining through the functions of all the organs, (yet) devoid of all the organs; unattached, and verily the supporter of all; without ality, and the perceiver of alities;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Sarvendriya-guna-abhasam' means that which illumines all the senses and their qualities (objects). The meaning of being devoid of senses ('indriya-varjitatvam'), etc., has been stated earlier.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
To show that the Knowable Brahman exists from another perspective also, the commentator says: 'Moreover' etc. Taking up the word 'bahir' (outside) to be explained, he explains: 'skin' etc. The meaning is that It is outside the elements, i.e., in the form of external objects etc. To the question, 'How can that which is non-Self be the Self?', he says: 'through imagination' i.e., 'as the Self'. He explains the meaning of the word 'antah' (inside): 'likewise'. It means It exists within the moving and unmoving beings, as their innermost Self. Introducing and explaining the second line, he says: 'bahir' etc. The meaning is that even that which appears in the middle as the elements in the form of various bodies is included in the Knowable, being reality. To the question, 'How can the collection of elements, which are of the nature of moving and unmoving beings, be the Knowable?', he answers: 'Just as'. Just as the imagined snake, etc., are included in the substratum rope, the appearance of the body is also included in the Knowable, and therefore its non-existence should not be suspected within the Knowable. If the Knowable is of the nature of all, why is It not grasped by all as 'this'?, he raises a doubt: 'If'. He answers: 'It is said'. He explains why it is unfit to be grasped as 'this', even though It appears as the Self of all things: 'True'. To the question, 'What happens if It is subtle?', he answers: 'Therefore'. Subtlety means being beyond the senses. If It is unknowable, how can there be liberation from its knowledge? To this he says: 'for the ignorant'. He states the result of the qualification: 'but for the wise'. If It is known by them as the Self, how can It be far away? To this doubt he says: 'due to not being known'. How then is It innermost? To this he says: 'and near'. With reference to the difference between the wise and the ignorant, the Sruti says, 'It is far, It is near, It is within all this...', and its meaning is paraphrased here in this context.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He (the Supreme Soul) is devoid of all senses, yet He is the illuminator of the objects of all the senses; He is unattached, yet the supporter of the entire universe; and He is devoid of qualities, yet the enjoyer of all qualities.

Commentary —

sarvendriyaguṇābhāsaṃ sarvendriyavivarjitam — First is the Supreme Soul, then His power is Prakriti (Nature). The effect of Prakriti is Mahat-tattva (cosmic intellect), the effect of Mahat-tattva is ego (Ahankara), the effect of ego is the five gross elements, the effect of the five gross elements is the mind and the ten senses, and the effect of the ten senses are the five sense objects — all these are effects of Prakriti. The Supreme Soul is beyond Prakriti and its effects. Whether He is Saguna (with attributes) or Nirguna (without attributes), Sakara (with form) or Nirakara (without form), He always remains beyond Prakriti. Even when He incarnates, He remains beyond Prakriti. At the time of incarnation, He manifests by bringing Prakriti under His control.

The bound soul, who considered himself associated with qualities and bound by them and thus went through the cycle of birth and death, is also said to be beyond qualities (guṇātīta) upon attaining the Supreme Lord; so how can the Supreme Lord ever be bound by qualities? He is always beyond (devoid of) qualities. Therefore, He is devoid of material senses, meaning He does not possess hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth, ears, etc., like worldly beings. Yet, He is completely capable of grasping the objects of those respective senses. For instance, even without ears, He hears the call of His devotees; without skin, He embraces His devotees; without eyes, He constantly watches over all living beings; without a tongue, He tastes the offerings made by His devotees; and so on. In this way, though devoid of the organs of knowledge (jnanendriyas), the Supreme Lord perceives objects like sound, touch, etc. Similarly, though devoid of the organs of action (karmendriyas), He speaks to His beloved devotees; though without feet, He runs to them when they call; though without hands, He accepts the gifts offered by His devotees; and so on. In this way, even without the organs of action, the Supreme Lord performs all actions of those organs. This is what is meant by the Lord illuminating the objects of the senses despite being devoid of the senses.

asaktaṃ सर्वभृच्चैव — The Lord has affection and love for all living beings, but He has no attachment to any being. Despite having no attachment, He sustains and nourishes all living beings from Brahma down to an ant. Just as parents support and nurture their child, the Lord supports and nurtures all beings many times more. Knowing exactly where each being is and when they need what, the Lord delivers it appropriately according to their need. Whether a being is on the earth, in the ocean, in the sky, or in heaven — that is, wherever in the three worlds a tiny or large creature may be, the Lord sustains them. Being the friend of all living beings, He purifies and cleanses all beings by destroying their sins and merits through favorable and unfavorable circumstances.

nirguṇaṃ guṇabhoktṛ ca — The Supreme Soul, though devoid of all qualities, is the enjoyer of all qualities. The meaning is that just as parents are pleased merely by seeing the activities of their child, similarly, the Supreme Lord is pleased merely by seeing the actions performed by His devotee. In other words, whatever actions the devotees perform, the Lord alone becomes the enjoyer of all those actions.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Sarvendriya-gunabhasam i.e., shining by the functions of the senses - means that which is shedding light on the functions of all the senses. The 'Gunas' of the senses means the activities of the senses. The meaning is that the self is capable of knowing the objects with the functioning of the senses. 'Yet devoid of the senses' i.e., It is capable by Itself, of knowing everything. Such is the meaning. It is 'detached', namely, It is free, by nature, from attachment to the bodies of gods etc. 'Yet supporting all,' yet capable of supporting all bodies, such as of gods etc., as declared in the Sruti. 'It is one, is threefold ৷৷.' (Cha. U., 7.26.2). It is devoid of Gunas, i.e., by nature It is devoid of Sattva etc., and yet It is the experiencer of the Gunas' - It has the capability to experience Sattva etc.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.13–13.18 jointly): Jneyam etc. upto visthitam.  Beginningless is  the Supreme Brahman :  by means of the attributes  (descriptions) like these, [the Bhagavat] describes the Brahman as being not separate from the Supreme Consciousness  (or action)  expressed in every utterance and  [thus] gracing  [the seeker] to infer his [or Its] own nature.  These attributes however have already been explained.  Hence what is the use of a fruitless repetition ?

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sarvendriya-guna-abhasam, shining through the functions of all the organs: By the use of the words all the organs are understood ears etc., known as the sense-organs and motor-organs, as also the internal organs-the intellect and the mind, for they are eally the limiting adjuncts of the Knowable. Besides, the organs of hearing etc. become the limiting adjuncts from the very fact of the internal organ becoming so. Hence, the Knowable gets expressed through determination, thinking, hearing, speaking, etc. that are the functions of all the organs, internal and external, which are the limiting adjuncts. In this way, It is manifest through the functions of all the organs. The idea is that, that Knowable appears to be as though active owing to the functions of all the organs, as it is said in the Upanisadic text, 'It thinks, as it were, and shakes, as it were' (Br. 4.3.7).
For that reason, again, is It not perceived as being actually active? In answer the Lord says: It is sarva-indriya-varitam, devoid of all the organs, i.e. bereft of all the instruments of action. Hence the Knowable is not active through the functioning of the instruments of action. As for the Upanisadic verse, 'Without hands and feet He moves swiftly and grasps; without eyes He sees, without ears He hears' (Sv. 3.19), etc.-that is meant for showing that that Knowable has the power of adapting Itself to the functions of all the organs which are Its limiting adjuncts; but it is not meant to show that It really has such activity as moving fast etc. The meaning of that verse is like that of the Vedic text, 'The blind one discoverd a gem' (Tai, Ar. 1.11). [This is an artha-veda (see note on p.530), which is not to be taken literally but interpreted in accordance with the context.]
Since the Knowable is devoid of all the instruments of actions, therefore It is asaktam, unattached, devoid of all associations. Although It is of this kind, yet it is ca eva, also verily; the sarva-bhrt, supporter of all. Indeed, everything has existence as its basis, because the idea of 'existence' is present everywhere. Verily, even mirage etc. do not occur without some basis. Therefore, It is sarva-bhrt, the supporter of all-It upholds everything.
There can be this other organs as well for the realization of the existence of the Knowable: Nirgunam, without ality-the alities are sattva, rajas and tamas; that Knowable is free from them; and yet It is the guna-bhoktr, perceiver of alities; i.e., that Knowable is the enjoyer and experiencer of the alities, sattva, rajas and tamas, which, assuming the forms of sound etc., transform them-selves into happiness, sorrow, delusion, etc.
Further,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
In the explanation 'I am the supreme power of Him', someone else, seeing an impossibility of meaning, said: 'Since the desire here is to make Brahman known only through the negation of all distinctions, the exposition of having power is contradictory.' That is incorrect, because distinction is indeed seen here. With this in mind, the author says: 'sarva' etc. It illumines, causes to know, or perceives the qualities, i.e., their objects. The word 'bhasate' is formed with the pacadi suffix. Similarly, 'having hands and feet everywhere' [13.14], 'supporting all', and 'enjoyer of qualities' are also to be cited as examples. Then how has it been said earlier: 'devoid of all senses, without qualities, unmoving' etc.? To this, the author says: 'indriya' etc. After the word 'adi' (etc.), the word 'sabda' (word) is to be understood. 'Earlier' means in the second chapter.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The purpose of limitation everywhere has indeed been explained in the commentary on 'anantam' [11.47] and 'avyaktam' [13.6]. By this, the performance of the functions of eyes, etc., everywhere is stated, in accordance with the Sruti texts: 'Without hands and feet He moves swiftly and grasps; without eyes He sees, without ears He hears' (Sve. U. 3.19) and 'With eyes everywhere and mouth everywhere' (Rigveda 4.7.27.1). This is due to the hearing of the non-material (aprakrita) senses after the negation of the material (prakrita) ones. The possession of contradictory attributes is stated in 'sarvendriya-guna-abhasam'.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Following the maxim, 'The worldless Reality is explained through superimposition (adhyaropa) and refutation (apavada)', the Supreme Brahman was explained earlier as 'beginningless, supreme' by superimposing the entire universe. Now, by refuting that superimposition, the commentator begins to explain 'It is called neither being nor non-being' to impart the knowledge of Its unconditioned nature: 'sarvendriya' etc. In reality, It is devoid of all senses (sarvendriya-vivarjita), but through Maya, It appears to shine through the qualities of all senses (sarvendriya-guna-abhasam) — i.e., through the functions of determination, conceptualization, hearing, speech, etc., of all the external senses like hearing and the internal senses, namely, mind and intellect, appearing in the form of their respective objects. The Knowable Brahman appears to be active as if through the functions of all the senses, in accordance with the Sruti text, 'It thinks, as it were, and shakes, as it were'. Here, 'thinking' is indicative of the functions of the intellect and organs of knowledge, while 'shaking' (motion) is indicative of the functions of the organs of action. Similarly, though in reality It is unattached (asaktam), i.e., devoid of all relations, yet through Maya, It is the supporter of all (sarvabhrit) — i.e., in Its aspect as Existence (Sat), It holds and sustains everything that is superimposed, since an illusion cannot exist without a substratum. Likewise, though in reality It is devoid of qualities (nirgunam), i.e., free from the qualities of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, yet It is the enjoyer of qualities (gunabhoktri) — i.e., It is the experiencer and perceiver of the qualities, namely, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, which transform themselves into happiness, sorrow, and delusion through the medium of sound, etc. This is the meaning of the Knowable Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover, 'sarvendriya' etc. It means that It shines in the form of those respective objects during the operations (vrittis) of all the senses like eyes, which take the forms of color, etc. Or, It illumines all the senses and their qualities, i.e., their respective objects. And It is devoid of all senses, as the Sruti declares: 'Without hands and feet He moves swiftly and grasps; without eyes He sees, without ears He hears', etc. It is unattached (asaktam), i.e., free from association. Still, It supports all (sarvabhrit), i.e., It is the substratum of everything. The same is devoid of qualities (nirgunam), i.e., free from qualities like Sattva, etc. It is the enjoyer of qualities (gunabhoktri), i.e., the enjoyer and protector of the qualities like Sattva, etc.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
To dispel the misconception that the Knowable directly possesses hands, etc., without the superimposition of the organs like hands, which are limiting adjuncts (upadhis), the Lord says 'sarva' etc. All those senses, namely, hearing, speech, etc., both the organs of knowledge and the organs of action, are included in the term 'all senses' because they are equally the limiting adjuncts of the Knowable, and also because the ears, etc., become adjuncts only through the medium of the internal organ; thus the mind and intellect are also comprehended. By this, the operations of the internal and external organs are indicated. To dispel the misconception that Brahman is actually active, the Lord says 'sarvendriya-vivarjitam' (devoid of all senses) — i.e., completely devoid of all organs in all three periods of time; hence the Knowable is not active in reality through the functions of the organs. If it is objected: 'Since the mantra "Without hands and feet He moves swiftly and grasps..." directly indicates that the Knowable possesses activities like swift movement, why is It not explained as active through the functions of the organs?', the answer is: in accordance with the Sruti "It thinks, as it were", the mantra also merely shows that the Knowable has the power of adapting Itself to the qualities of all sensory adjuncts. Just like the artha-vada mantra "The blind one discovered a gem", this Sruti is an artha-vada and does not have its primary purport in the actual possession of activities like swift movement; hence there is no contradiction with the context. Being devoid of all organs, It is unattached (asaktam), i.e., completely free from all associations, in accordance with the Sruti "He is unattached". Though in reality free from all association, It is the substratum of all: 'sarva-bhrit ca eva' — by Its mere existence It sustains everything as the substratum. Thus runs the syllogism: 'The subject of discussion (the world) is superimposed on Reality, because it is cognized as pervaded by Reality, just like the illusion of multiple moons is cognized as pervaded by the single moon.' Therefore, all practical and apparent objects cannot be without a basis; when investigated, they are found to have Existence (Sat) as their basis, and hence the Knowable is the supporter of all (sarvabhrit). Though It is the substratum of all, It is in reality devoid of qualities (nirgunam), i.e., free from the qualities of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. Although this is so, yet through Maya, It is the enjoyer of qualities (gunabhoktri) — i.e., It is the enjoyer and perceiver of the qualities, namely, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, which transform themselves into happiness, sorrow, and delusion through the medium of sound, etc.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
To the objection, 'Senses alone are the instruments, not the qualities of the senses', the commentator says: 'qualities of the senses mean the functions of the senses'. To the question, 'How can the self-luminous self-nature be illumined by the functions of the senses? Even if the illumination of objects is intended, how is sensory knowledge spoken of in the context of the pure self-nature?', he says: 'even by the functions of the senses'. To refute the view of others that the self-nature shines through the qualities of the senses, he says: 'one whose illumination is by the qualities of the senses'. The meaning is that this capability exists even in the state of liberation. By this, the far-fetched imagination of Shankara that 'the Knowable appears to be active through the functions of all the senses' is rejected. How can one who possesses senses at some time be devoid of all senses? To this he says: 'by nature'. If all senses are negated, there would be no knowledge dependent on them, which would lead to the state of being like a stone as asserted by others; he refutes this with the words stated earlier: 'even without'. Since the liberated self does not support the universe nor support various bodies in turn, its power in this regard is intended here. Natural freedom from association is expressed by 'asaktam', which he explains as 'by nature, from gods etc.' He shows its capability by the effect occurring in the liberated state: 'It is one, is threefold...'. Since the self-nature is indivisible, the statement that it becomes threefold, etc., is only through the bodies assumed by it. By this, the view of others that 'supporting all means being the substratum of all superimpositions' is refuted. Under 'nirgunam', the inherence of qualities like Sattva, etc., is not denied, because there is no possibility of them in the pure state, nor does it contradict 'gunabhoktri'; therefore, what is refuted here is the experience of material qualities caused by karma. Hence, there is no scope for the theory of attributelessness (Nirviseshavada). With this in mind, he says: 'by nature devoid of qualities like Sattva etc.' By 'by nature', the contradiction with being the enjoyer of qualities is resolved. While the enjoyment of qualities is conditional (due to adjuncts), its absence is natural, but the mere capacity for it is eternal; thus there is no contradiction.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover, 'sarvendriya-guna-abhasam' means shining in the qualities like form, etc., of all the senses like eyes. By this, it is indicated that whatever beauty etc. exists anywhere, it is solely due to its relationship with the Lord. Then will It be endowed with worldly senses? To this the author says: 'sarvendriyair-vivarjitam' i.e., devoid of them. By this, the non-material (alaukika) nature of the aforementioned senses is indicated. He explains the same with 'asaktam' etc. 'Asaktam' means devoid of attachment everywhere, by which the absence of association is indicated. And yet, It is 'sarvabhrit' i.e., the substratum of all. Fearing that being the supporter of all might imply possession of qualities (sagunatva), he says: 'nirgunam' i.e., free from qualities like Sattva, etc. Fearing the uselessness of qualities, he says: 'gunabhoktri ca' i.e., remaining in the qualities It experiences them. By the word 'ca' (and), it is indicated that It is also their protector.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
If it is objected: 'Just like the sacrificial post (yupa) and the Ahavaniya fire, which are non-material (alaukika), Brahman is also qualified by the cause-effect universe and is indeed multiform; and It is supported as subordinate to action by the scripture through texts like "having hands and feet everywhere". And it cannot be said that the scripture is intent only on meditation and cannot establish the multiformity of Brahman; because, just like the bodies of deities, etc., established by the Nyaya of Devatadhikarana, this multiformity is also established as an intermediate purport. Nor can it be said that the bodies of deities have only empirical reality and not absolute reality, being sublated by the knowledge of Brahman; because the duality of existence is not recognized. Therefore, having hands and feet everywhere is real for Brahman and does not merit refutation.' To this objection, the author says: 'sarvendriya' etc. All internal and external organs, namely, mind, intellect, ego, consciousness, and the senses like hearing, are comprehended by the term 'grasping instrument' (grahaka). And the 'qualities' mean the objects of perception, by which the 'grasped object' (grahya) is comprehended. Brahman appears as if possessing all grasped objects and grasping instruments, but is not in reality of the nature of grasped and grasper, which is multiform. Just as the sun reflected in water appears to be below and to tremble, but is not in reality below or trembling, similarly, the Self's possession of the form of grasped and grasper is illusory. Why is this so? Because It is 'sarvendriya-vivarjitam' (devoid of all senses) — the word 'indriya' here is also indicative of their qualities (objects). Indeed, in Brahman, there is no object of perception like form, etc., nor any instrument of perception like the mind. This is in accordance with scriptural texts like 'without sound, without touch, without form, undecaying', 'without vital force, without mind, pure', 'that which is invisible, ungraspable, without eyes and ears, without hands and feet'. Therefore, Brahman is not multiform or qualified by the universe. Then how does the scripture say 'all is Brahman'? To this he says: 'asaktam sarvabhrit ca eva'. Here, by stating 'supporting all' (sarvabhrit), i.e., being the substratum of all, It is declared to be distinct from everything. Is this relationship of support and supported between Brahman and all else like that of a pot and its color by the relation of inherence (samavaya), or like that of a bowl and plums by the relation of conjunction (samyoga)? Fearing such a doubt, he says that Brahman is the supporter of all without any relationship: 'asaktam' (unattached). If it is objected: 'Is this not contradictory, to say It is unattached and yet the supporter of all?', the answer is: no, there is no error. Just as the barren land is not attached to the water of a mirage, yet is its substratum, similarly this will be. If it is objected: 'In this way, the falsity of the universe would follow, and thereby the injunctions regarding actions and worship would be obstructed', the answer is: no. As long as duality is not sublated by the knowledge of the identity of Brahman and the Self, all empirical behavior of action and factors of action is accepted as real, in accordance with the Sruti 'the vital forces are real, and He is the Reality of them'; where, after stating the empirical reality of the entire universe indicated by the vital forces, Brahman is shown as the absolute Reality which is even higher. Reality means non-sublatability; that exists for some time for the vital forces, but for Brahman it is universal (at all times and places), just as the difference between kings when one says 'the king of kings' is clear due to the smallness or greatness of sovereignty. Therefore, the possession of attributes by Brahman is prior to the knowledge of the partless Self, and not after it, and it can certainly be sublated by the knowledge of truth; hence, the unconditioned Brahman cannot be made subordinate to any action. Since upon Its realization, the duality of action, factor of action, etc., is destroyed, the distinction between worshipper, worshipped, and worship is sublated. Therefore, what was said earlier, that the form created by limiting adjuncts is false, is correct. Moreover, It is 'nirgunam gunabhoktri ca'. Though devoid of the relation of grasper and grasped, yet when the graspers like intellect, etc., are in contact with the grasped objects and are transformed into forms like happiness, etc., Brahman, merely by being their illuminator, can be the enjoyer of qualities in the form of a reflection of consciousness (Chidabhasa). Just like the trembling, etc., caused by the limiting adjunct (water) in the reflected sun. This is in accordance with the Sruti: 'It thinks, as it were, and shakes, as it were'. When the intellect thinks, the reflection of consciousness entered therein appears to think of objects; when the intellect shakes (goes to the object region), It also appears to shake, but not by itself. By this, the text 'Without hands and feet He moves swiftly and grasps...' is also to be explained as meaning that the Knowable has the power of adapting Itself to the qualities of the sensory adjuncts. The meaning is that even though He is without feet, He becomes fast-moving in a fast-moving foot. The collection of texts like 'The blind one discovered a gem...' is also to be considered here. Therefore, what was said, that It is devoid of qualities and yet the enjoyer of qualities, is correct. In the Bhashya, however, 'nirgunam' is explained as free from the qualities of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, and yet the 'enjoyer' and perceiver of those qualities when they are transformed into the forms of happiness, sorrow, and delusion through the medium of sound, etc.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without senses. He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living beings. He transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is the master of all the modes of material nature.

 The Supreme Lord, although the source of all the senses of the living entities, doesn’t have material senses like they have. Actually, the individual souls have spiritual senses, but in conditioned life they are covered with the material elements, and therefore the sense activities are exhibited through matter. The Supreme Lord’s senses are not so covered. His senses are transcendental and are therefore called nirguṇa. Guṇa means the material modes, but His senses are without material covering. It should be understood that His senses are not exactly like ours. Although He is the source of all our sensory activities, He has His transcendental senses, which are uncontaminated. This is very nicely explained in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (3.19) in the verse apāṇi-pādo javano grahītā. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no hands which are materially contaminated, but He has His hands and accepts whatever sacrifice is offered to Him. That is the distinction between the conditioned soul and the Supersoul. He has no material eyes, but He has eyes – otherwise how could He see? He sees everything – past, present and future. He lives within the heart of the living being, and He knows what we have done in the past, what we are doing now, and what is awaiting us in the future. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā : He knows everything, but no one knows Him. It is said that the Supreme Lord has no legs like us, but He can travel throughout space because He has spiritual legs. In other words, the Lord is not impersonal; He has His eyes, legs, hands and everything else, and because we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord we also have these things. But His hands, legs, eyes and senses are not contaminated by material nature. Bhagavad-gītā also confirms that when the Lord appears He appears as He is by His internal potency. He is not contaminated by the material energy, because He is the Lord of material energy. In the Vedic literature we find that His whole embodiment is spiritual. He has His eternal form, called sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha. He is full of all opulence. He is the proprietor of all wealth and the owner of all energy. He is the most intelligent and is full of knowledge. These are some of the symptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the maintainer of all living entities and the witness of all activity. As far as we can understand from Vedic literature, the Supreme Lord is always transcendental. Although we do not see His head, face, hands or legs, He has them, and when we are elevated to the transcendental situation we can see the Lord’s form. Due to materially contaminated senses, we cannot see His form. Therefore the impersonalists, who are still materially affected, cannot understand the Personality of Godhead.