Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
rājansaṃsmṛtya saṃsmṛtya saṃvādamimamadbhutam .
keśavārjunayoḥ puṇyaṃ hṛṣyāmi ca muhurmuhuḥ

Word Meanings:
राजन् - O King
संस्मृत्य - having remembered
संस्मृत्य - having remembered
संवादम् - the dialogue
इमम् - this
अद्भुतम् - wonderful
केशवार्जुनयोः - between Kesava and Arjuna
पुण्यम् - holy
हृष्यामि - rejoice
च - and
मुहुः - again
मुहुः - again.

Life Application:
O King, remembering again and again this wonderful, holy dialogue between Keshava and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O King, remembering again and again this wonderful and holy dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna, I rejoice repeatedly.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
O King, remembering this wonderful and holy dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again.

राजन् O King? संस्मृत्य having remembered? संस्मृत्य having remembered? संवादम् the dialogue? इमम् this? अद्भुतम् wonderful? केशवार्जुनयोः between Kesava and Arjuna? पुण्यम् holy? हृष्यामि (I) rejoice? च and? मुहुः again? मुहुः again.Commentary Rajan King Dhritarashtra to whom the Gita is narrated by Sanjaya.Punyam Holy because the mere hearing of the dialogue destroys a multitude of sins and makes the hearer pious and Godfearing and turns his mind towards God.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
O King! The more I think of that marvellous and holy discourse, the more I lose myself in joy.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Sanjaya expresses his clear reaction after listening to the divine poetry of the Gita: this dialogue between Lord Keshava and the human Arjuna—representing the complete and the incomplete, the high and the low—is wonderful and holy. The knowledge of the Gita heard by Sanjaya was so profound and attractively intelligible that by remembering it again and again, he rejoiced in his heart repeatedly. The Gita teaches the art of living. It makes a man the monarch of his inner circumstances. In the state of ignorance, man's life is only a mad dance of death, the appearance and disappearance of things and beings. But a person educated in the wisdom of the Gita recognizes a rhythm, beholds beauty, and hears sweet music in the same ordinary daily life. Sanjaya now recalls the vision of the Cosmic Form in the next verse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O king !  By recollecting and recollecting this wonderful pious dialogue of  Kesava and  Arjuna, I feel also delighted again and again.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
O King, remembering again and again this wondrous and auspicious dialogue betweenn Sri Krsna and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And, O king, while repeatedly remembering this unie, sacred dialogue between Kesava and Arjuna, I rejoice every moment.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
O King, remembering again and again this wonderful and holy dialogue between Kesava and Arjuna, I rejoice repeatedly. The memory of this sacred conversation continues to elevate Sanjaya's consciousness.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O King, remembering again and again this wonderful and holy dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna, I rejoice repeatedly. Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains Sanjaya's inner bliss: 1. Remembering again and again (saṃṣmṛtya saṃsmṛtya): Sanjaya's state of joy is so intense that the memory of the dialogue keeps returning to him automatically, bringing fresh waves of bliss. 2. Wonderful and holy (adbhutaṃ puṇyam): The dialogue is 'wonderful' because it contains ultimate wisdom, and 'holy' because it purifies the listener's heart of all sins. 3. I rejoice repeatedly (hṛṣyāmi ca muhurmuhuḥ): Each time Sanjaya remembers the dialogue, he experiences a spiritual thrill, showing that divine joy is ever-fresh.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Remembering this auspicious and wondrous dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, directly heard by me, I rejoice again and again.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.74–18.78 jointly): Ityaham etc. upto matir mama While concluding the [Krsna-Arjuna]  dialogue with Sanjaya's speech, the [sage Vyasa] teaches this :  What leads to the Absolute Brahman is nothing but the recollection of the purport of the dialoguea recollection that is led finally to the status of the highly vivid, direct cognition admitting no differentiation  [between its subject and object],  resulting from the continuity helped by the series of incessant contemplations [on the purport of the dialogue] according to the method of firmly fixing.  Thus, only through the recollection of the dialogue of the Bhagavat and Arjuna, the Reality could be reached and due to that come fortunes, voctories and prosperity.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And, rajan, O king, Dhrtarastra; after having heard, samsmrtya samsmrtya, while repeatedly remembering; imam, this; adbhuttam, unie; samvadam, dialogue; kesava-arjunayoh, between Kesava and Arjuna; which is punyam, sacred, removes sin even when heard; hrsyami, I rejoice; muhuh, muhuh, every moment.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
O King, remembering this wonderful dialogue of Keshava and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
O King, I have not only heard but am remembering again and again this wonderful dialogue between Keshava and Arjuna, which is holy and destroys all sins just by hearing. The repetition of the word 'remembering' indicates intense excitement. I rejoice at every moment, experiencing bodily horripilation.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore, O King: 'rajan...'. I rejoice, meaning I experience bodily thrill and obtain supreme happiness. The rest is clear.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Furthermore, remembering again and again this wonderful and holy dialogue between Keshava and Arjuna, which removes all sins just by hearing, I rejoice and experience bodily thrill at every moment. By addressing Dhritarashtra as 'O King' (Rajan), Sanjaya suggests: 'You too should abandon enmity, adopt devotion to Krishna, and become a truly glorious and happy king.'

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The Lord states the dialogue is wonderful and holy. Holy (punyam) means it is purifying like a sacrifice. Wonderful (adbhutam) means it causes great amazement in terms of words and meaning.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Furthermore, O King, remembering again and again this dialogue between Keshava and Arjuna, which is wonderful (beyond worldly reasoning) and purifying, I experience joy repeatedly.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sanjaya describes the joy born of hearing the Keshava-Arjuna dialogue and seeing the Cosmic Form (Vishvarupa) in these two verses. Holy (punyam) means it destroys all sins. The repetition 'remembering, remembering' indicates intense excitement.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.

 The understanding of Bhagavad-gītā is so transcendental that anyone who becomes conversant with the topics of Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa becomes righteous and he cannot forget such talks. This is the transcendental position of spiritual life. In other words, one who hears the Gītā from the right source, directly from Kṛṣṇa, attains full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The result of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is that one becomes increasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life with a thrill, not only for some time, but at every moment.