Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
ahaṃkāraṃ balaṃ darpaṃ kāmaṃ krodhaṃ parigraham .
vimucya nirmamaḥ śānto brahmabhūyāya kalpate

Word Meanings:
अहङ्कारम् - egoism
बलम् - strength
दर्पम् - arrogance
कामम् - desire
क्रोधम् - anger
परिग्रहम् - covetousness
विमुच्य - having abandoned
निर्ममः - without mineness
शान्तः - peaceful
ब्रह्मभूयाय - for becoming Brahman
कल्पते - is fit.

Life Application:
Free from egoism, power, pride, lust, anger, possessiveness, tranquil in mind—he is fit for becoming one with Brahman.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Having abandoned egoism, strength, arrogance, desire, anger, and possessiveness, and being free from the notion of 'mine' and peaceful, he is fit for attaining Brahman.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Having abandoned egoism, strength, arrogance, desire, anger and covetousness, and free from the notion of 'mine' and peaceful,  he is fit for becoming Brahman.

अहङ्कारम् egoism? बलम् strength? दर्पम् arrogance? कामम् desire? क्रोधम् anger? परिग्रहम् covetousness? विमुच्य having abandoned? निर्ममः without mineness? शान्तः peaceful? ब्रह्मभूयाय for becoming Brahman? कल्पते (he) is fit.Commentary Egoism Identifying the Self with the body? etc. This is the error of mistaking the physical body for the pure immortal Self.Balam That strength which is combined or united with passion? desire and attachment? and not the physical or other strength. Physical strength is natural. It is not possible to abandon this physical strength.Darpam Arrogance? insolence? selfassertive Rajasic vehemence this follows the state of exaltion.,Man becomes arrogant when he possesses wealth or much learning. When he becomes arrogant he violates Dharma and does wicked deeds.The aspirant even abandons the things which are necessary for the bare maintenance of the body. He becomes a ParamahamsaParivrajaka? a wandering or itinerant ascetic. He has no attachment to his body. He knows that even the body does not belong to him.Santa Peaceful? tranil? serene.Such an aspirant who has devotion to Selfknowledge? and who is endowed with the above virtues is fit to become Brahman.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Having abandoned selfishness, power, arrogance, anger and desire, possessing nothing of his own and having attained peace, he is fit to join the Eternal Spirit.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Having abandoned egoism, force, pride, desire, anger, and possessiveness, free from the notion of 'mine,' and peaceful, he is fit for attaining Brahman. Commentary: This verse lists the negative traits to be discarded for success in meditation. Egoism is false identification with body-mind. Force (Bala) here refers to strength driven by passion, not healthy self-discipline. Pride (Darpa) leads to deviation from righteousness. Covetousness (Parigraha) is hoarding beyond bare necessities. Abandoning these leads to a peace born of Self-realization, making the seeker qualified to realize Brahman.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Relinshing egotism, violence, pride, desire, wrath, and the sense of possession-he, the unselfish and calm one, is capable of becoming the Brahman.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Forsaking egoism, power, pride, desire, wrath and possession, with no feeling of 'mine' and tranil - he becomes worthy for the state of brahman.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
(That person,) having discarded egotism, force, pride, desire, anger and superfluous possessions, free from the idea of possession, and serene, is fit for becoming Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
He is fit for becoming Brahman, meaning establishing himself always in Brahman, keeping his mind ever absorbed in Him.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Discarding egoism, power (associated with desire), pride, desire, anger, and superfluous possessions, becoming a mendicant, free from the idea of possession even regarding his body and life, and for this reason serene, the monk is fit for the realization of Brahman.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Having abandoned egoism, force, pride, desire, anger, and possessiveness, free from the notion of 'mine' and peaceful, he is fit for attaining Brahman.

Commentary: The seeker abandons egoism (identifying with the body), force (rigidity and insistences), pride (arrogance from material possessions), desire for sensory enjoyment, anger (arising from blocked desire), and possessiveness (gathering objects). Free from mineness (even toward the body or tools) and remaining internally quiet, he becomes fit for Self-realization and union with Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Endowed with a purified understanding' means endowed with the Buddhi capable of understanding the self as it is in reality; 'subduing the mind by steadiness' means making the mind fit for meditation by turning away from external and internal objects; 'relinishing sound and other objects of senses' means keeping them far away, casting aside love and hate occasioned by them (i.e., the sense objects).

'Resorting to solitude' means living in a lonely place free from hindrances to meditation; 'eat but little' means eating neither too much nor too little; 'restraining speech, body and mind' means directing the operations of body, speech and mind to meditation; 'ever engaged in the Yoga of meditation' means being like this, i.e., constantly engaged in the Yoga of meditation day after day until death; 'taking refuge in dispassion' means developing aversion to all objects except the one entity to be meditated upon, by considering the imperfections of all objects and thus cultivating detachment to everything.

Forsaking 'egoism' means abandoning the tendency to consider what is other than the self, as well as neutralising the power of forcible Vasnas (tendencies) which nourish (egoism), and the resulting pride, desire, wrath and possessiveness. 'With no feeling of mine' means free from the notion that what does not belong to oneself belongs to oneself; 'Who is tranil' means, who finds sole happiness in experiencing the self. One who has become like this and performs the Yoga of meditation becomes worthy for the state of Brahman. The meaning is that, freed from all bonds, he experiences the self as It really is.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
(That person) vimucya, having discarded; ahan-karam, egotism, thinking of the body, organs, etc. as the ego; balam, force-which is associated with desire and attachment; not the other kind of strength consisting in the fitness of the body etc., becuase being natural it cannot be descarded-; darpam, pride, which follows elation and leads to transgresson of righteousness-for the Smrti says, 'An elated person becomes proud; a proud man transgresses righteousness' (Ap. Dh. Su. 1.13.4); kamam, desire; krodham, anger, aversion; parigraham, superfluous possessions-even after removing the defects in the organs and the mind, there arises the possibility of acceptance of gifts either for the maintenance of the body or for righteous duties; discarding them as well, i.e. becoming a mendicant of the param-hamsa class; nirmamah, free from the idea of possession, becoming devoid of the idea of 'me' and 'mine' even with regard to so much as one's body and life; and for the very same reason, santah, serene, withdrawn; the monk who is effortless and steadfast in Knowledge, kalpate, becomes fit; brahma-bhuyaya, for becoming Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Being fit for Brahman here does not mean liberation itself, but the maturity of meditation which leads to final realization.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Abandoning egoism, power, arrogance, desire, anger, and covetousness, free from the notion of 'mine' and peaceful, he is fit for attaining Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Renouncing egoism, force (stubbornness driven by passion), pride, desire, anger, and possessiveness (even righteous or bodily requirements), becoming a Paramahamsa ascetic, free from 'mine' even toward body and life, and thus serene, the monk is fit for the direct realization of Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Renouncing egoism, stubbornness, pride, desire, anger, and possessiveness, free from the notion of 'mine' and peaceful, he is fit for attaining Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Discarding egoism, power (associated with desire), pride, desire, anger, and superfluous possessions, becoming a paramahamsa ascetic, free from 'mine' even with regard to body and life, and thus serene, the monk is fit for the realization of Brahman.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Abandoning egoism, power of impressions (vasanas) which nourish egoism, pride, desire, anger, and possessiveness, free from the notion that what is not the Self is one's own, and finding sole happiness in experiencing the Self, he is fit for the state of Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Having abandoned egoism, force, pride, desire, anger, and possessiveness, free from the notion of 'mine' and peaceful, he is fit for attaining Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Abandoning egoism, force, pride, desire, anger, and possessiveness, free from the notion of 'mine' and peaceful, he is fit for attaining Brahman.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Freeing oneself from egoism, force, arrogance, desire, anger, and possession, tranquil and free from possessiveness, one is fit for becoming one with the Absolute.

 When one is purified by intelligence, he keeps himself in the mode of goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in trance. He is not attached to the objects of sense gratification, and he is free from attachment and hatred in his activities. Such a detached person naturally prefers to live in a secluded place, he does not eat more than what he requires, and he controls the activities of his body and mind. He has no false ego because he does not accept the body as himself. Nor has he a desire to make the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things. Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. He is satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of the Lord, and he is never angry in the absence of sense gratification. Nor does he endeavor to acquire sense objects. Thus when he is completely free from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all material things, and that is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage is called the brahma-bhūta stage. When one is free from the material conception of life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated. This is described in Bhagavad-gītā (2.70) : āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī “A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires – that enter like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but is always still – can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.”