Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
manmanā bhava madbhakto madyājī māṃ namaskuru .
māmevaiṣyasi satyaṃ te pratijāne priyo.asi me

Word Meanings:
मन्मनाः - with mind fixed on
भव - be
मद्भक्तः - devoted to Me
मद्याजी - sacrifice to Me
माम् - to Me
नमस्कुरु - bow down
माम् - to Me
एव - even
एष्यसि - shalt come
सत्यम् - truth
ते - to thee
प्रतिजाने - promise
प्रियः - dear
असि - art
मे - of Me.

Life Application:
Fix your mind on God with complete devotion and worship today to attain ultimate spiritual liberation.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, sacrifice to Me, bow down to Me. You shall come to Me; truly do I promise unto you, for you are dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Fix thy mind on Me, by devoted to Me, sacrifice to Me, bow down to Me. Thou shalt come even to Me; truly do I promise unto thee, (for) thou art dear to Me.

मन्मनाः with mind fixed on Me? भव be? मद्भक्तः devoted to Me? मद्याजी sacrifice to Me? माम् to Me? नमस्कुरु bow down? माम् to Me? एव even? एष्यसि (thou) shalt come? सत्यम् truth? ते to thee? प्रतिजाने (I) promise? प्रियः dear? असि (thou) art? मे of Me.Commentary Develop onepointedness of mind. Fix thy thought on Me. If the mind wanders bring it again and again to the centre or point or object of meditation? through constant practice. Offer all thy actions to Me. Let thy tongue utter My name. Let thy hands work for Me. Let thy feet move for Me. Let all thy actions be for Me. Give up hatred towards any living creature. Bow down to Me. Then thou wilt attain Me.The Lord gives Arjuna His definite word of promise or solemn declaration. Having received My grace thou wilt gain complete knowledge of Me and that in itself will indeed lead to thy absorption into My Being.O Arjuna? looking up to Me alone as thy aim and the sole refuge? thou shalt assuredly come to,Me.Have faith in the words of the Lord and make a solemn promise. Take the Lord as your sole refuge. You will attain final emancipation.The secret of devotion is to take the Lord as your sole refuge. In the next verse the Lord proceeds to speak of the gist of selfsurrender. (Cf.IX.34XII.8)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Dedicate thyself to Me, worship Me, sacrifice all for Me, prostrate thyself before Me, and to Me thou shalt surely come. Truly do I pledge thee; thou art My own beloved.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
By stating the four qualities required to attain God, Lord Krishna reassures Arjuna, 'You will come to Me.' When the principle of self-realization is summarized briefly, it appears so simple that ordinary students do not try to understand it deeply or ignore it altogether. To avoid this mistake, Lord Krishna emphasizes it again. Any seeker endowed with the devotion described in this verse becomes eligible to attain the Lord. 'You shall come to Me' is the Lord's true promise. Adi Shankaracharya states that the ultimate secret of Karma-yoga is the attitude of surrender to God. After summarizing the practice of Karma-yoga, what remains is the description of self-realization (which is the fruit of Karma-yoga) and represents the essence of all Upanishads. Therefore, the Lord speaks in the next verse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Be with your mind fixed in Me; be My devotee; offer oblation to Me and render salutation to Me; you shall come to Me alone.  Really I promise you, (because) you are dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Focus your mind on Me. Be My devotee. Be My worshipper. Prostrate before Me. You shall come to Me alone. I promise you, trully; for you are dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Have your mind fixed on Me, be My devotee, be a sacrificer to Me and bow down to Me. (Thus) you will come to Me alone. (This) truth do I pormise to you. (For) you are dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me, and offer obeisance to Me. By doing so, you will indeed come to Me (attain Me). I make this solemn promise to you in truth, because you are very dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Fix your mind on Me, be My devotee, worship Me, and bow down to Me. Thus, you will come to Me; I promise you this in truth, for you are dear to Me.

Commentary: The Lord now reveals the highest confidential secret of the entire Gita: complete devotion to Him. It consists of four elements: fixing the mind on the Lord (man-mana), being devoted to Him with love (mad-bhakta), performing all sacrifices/duties for His pleasure (mad-yaji), and bowing down to Him in humility (mam namaskuru). By cultivating these four aspects, the devotee becomes fully absorbed in the Lord and is guaranteed to attain Him. To remove any doubt, the Lord makes a solemn oath ('I promise you in truth') and gives the reason: 'for you are dear to Me.' This shows that love is the binding force between the devotee and the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
What is enjoined in Vedanta texts such as 'I know the Great Person of the radiance of the sun, who is beyond this Prakrti. Knowing Him thus, one becomes here immortal; there is no path for immortality' (Sve. U., 3.8); what is designated by words such as knowledge (Vedanta), meditation (Dhyana) and worship (Upasana); what is of the form of direct perception (Darsana) having the character of continuous succession of memory of a surpassingly loving nature to the worshipped - it is this that is enjoined herein by the words 'Focus your mind on Me,' 'Be My devotee.' It means, be one to whom I am incomparably dear. Since I am the object of superabundant love, meditate on Me, i.e., practise the succession of memory of unsurpassed love of Me. Such is the meaning. Be My worshipper (yaji). Here also the expression, 'Be My devotee' is applicable. Yajna is worship. Worship Me as one exceedingly dear to you. Worship (Aradhana) is complete subservience to the Lord. Prostrate before Me. Prostration means bowing down. The meaning is:  Bow down humbly before Me with great love.

Renouncing thus all ego-centredness, you shall come to Me. I make this solemn promise to you. Do not take it as a mere flattery. For you are dear to Me. It has been already stated, 'For I am inexpressibly dear to the man of knowledge and dear is he to Me' (7.17). He in whom there is surpassing love for Me, I hold him also as surpassingly dear to Me. Conseently, not being able to bear separation from him, I myself will enable him to attain Me. It is this truth alone that has been solemnly declared to you in the expression that 'you shall come to Me alone.'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sarva - etc.  Manmanah etc, By the portion  'Be with your mind fixed in Me' etc., it is determined that in the scriptures the importance completely lies only in dedicating [everything] to the Brahman; and it is declared that this present scripture  (the Holy Bhagavatgita) is of use [only] in the case of  one who cultivates [the attitude of]  dedication to the Brahman.  			
 Also He says -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Bhava manmana, have your mind fixed on Me; be mad-bhaktah, My devotee; be a madyaji,sacrificer to Me, be engaged in sacrifices to Me; namaskuru, bow down; mam, to Me. Offer ever your salutations to Me alone. Continuing thus in them, by surrendering all ends, means and needs to Vasudeva only, esyasi, you will come; mam, to Me; eva, alone. (This) satyam, truth: do I pratijane, promise; te, to you, i.e. in this matter I make this true promise. For, asi, you are; priyah, dear; me, to Me.
The idea conveyed by the passage is: Having thus understood that the Lord is true in His pormise, and knowing for certain that liberation is the unfailing result of devotion to the Lord, one should have dedication to God as his only supreme goal.
Having summed up surrender to God as the highest secret of steadiness in Karma-yoga, there-after, with the idea that complete realization, which is the fruit of adherence to Karma-yoga and which has been enjoined in all the Upanisads, has to be spoken about, the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Lord explains: 'manmanā bhava...'. O Partha! Fix your mind on Me alone, who am the ocean of affection for My devotees and am acting as your charioteer. Be My devotee, worship Me, and surrender to Me. By doing so, you will certainly attain Me. I promise you this in truth, because you are dear to Me. It is not proper to deceive one who is beloved.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The Lord details the practice: 'manmanā bhava...'. Fix your mind always on Me, the Lord Vasudeva. Be devoted to Me with intense love. Worship Me always, and if you lack materials for worship, simply bow down to Me with body, speech, and mind. This represents all forms of devotional service (like hearing, chanting, remembering, etc., as described in the Srimad Bhagavatam). By doing so, you will certainly attain Me. Do not doubt this. I make this true promise because you are dear to Me, and it is not proper to deceive one who is dear.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The Lord explains: 'manmanā bhava...'. Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me, and offer obeisance to Me. By doing so, you will obtain My grace and attain Me. Do not have any doubt in this. Because you are dear to Me, I make this true promise to you.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The Lord answers what that secret is: 'manmanā bhava...'. Fix your mind always on Me, the Lord Vasudeva. Be My devotee through hearing, chanting, etc. Worship Me and offer obeisance to Me. By dedicating all actions, means, and goals to Me, you will certainly attain Me and gain the knowledge of non-difference from Me. I make this true promise to you, because you are very dear to Me. Understanding My truthfulness, you should take sole refuge in Me.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Focus your mind constantly on Me. Be devoted to Me with supreme love. Perform worship to Me, and offer obeisance to Me. By doing so, you will certainly reach Me. I make this solemn promise to you, because you are very dear to Me. The path of Bhakti is the direct means to attain Me, and this promise is made to assure you of your ultimate success. The repetition of the verse 'man-manā bhava' serves to show that this is the ultimate purpose of the scripture.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The Lord details the path: 'manmanā bhava...'. Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me, and offer obeisance to Me. By doing so, you will certainly attain Me, who am the embodiment of truth. Do not have any doubt. Because you are dear to Me, I make this solemn promise to you.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The Lord explains the most secret path: 'manmanā bhava...'. Fix your mind on Me, who am the indwelling soul, pure bliss, and consciousness. By doing so, the identity of Brahman and the Self is realized (representing the last six chapters of the Gita). To obtain this state, be My devotee (representing the middle six chapters). To develop devotion, perform actions dedicated to Me (representing the first six chapters). If you cannot perform ritual worship, simply bow down to Me with body, speech, and mind. By doing so, you will certainly attain Me. I make this solemn promise because you are extremely dear to Me.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend.

 The most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa and always think of Him and act for Him. One should not become an official meditator. Life should be so molded that one will always have the chance to think of Kṛṣṇa. One should always act in such a way that all his daily activities are in connection with Kṛṣṇa. He should arrange his life in such a way that throughout the twenty-four hours he cannot but think of Kṛṣṇa. And the Lord’s promise is that anyone who is in such pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness will certainly return to the abode of Kṛṣṇa, where he will be engaged in the association of Kṛṣṇa face to face. This most confidential part of knowledge is spoken to Arjuna because he is the dear friend of Kṛṣṇa. Everyone who follows the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend to Kṛṣṇa and obtain the same perfection as Arjuna. These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Kṛṣṇa – the very form with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with a beautiful face and peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptions of Kṛṣṇa found in the Brahma-saṁhitā and other literatures. One should fix his mind on this original form of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. One should not even divert his attention to other forms of the Lord. The Lord has multiforms as Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa, Rāma, Varāha, etc., but a devotee should concentrate his mind on the form that was present before Arjuna. Concentration of the mind on the form of Kṛṣṇa constitutes the most confidential part of knowledge, and this is disclosed to Arjuna because Arjuna is the most dear friend of Kṛṣṇa’s.