Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
pitāsi lokasya carācarasya tvamasya pūjyaśca gururgarīyān .
na tvatsamo.astyabhyadhikaḥ kuto.anyo lokatraye.apyapratimaprabhāva

Word Meanings:
पिता - Father
असि - art
लोकस्य - of the world
चराचरस्य - of the moving and
त्वम् - Thou
अस्य - of this
पूज्यः - to be reserved
च - and
गुरुः - the Guru
गरीयान् - weightier
न - not
त्वत्समः - equal to You
अस्ति - is
अभ्यधिकः - surpassing
कुतः - whence
अन्यः - other
लोकत्रये - in the three worlds
अपि - also
अप्रतिमप्रभाव - O Being of unequalled power

Life Application:
Revere God as the father of all moving and unmoving things, the greatest teacher, unequaled in all worlds.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
You are the Father of this moving and non-moving world, worthy of worship, and the greatest Guru. O Lord of matchless power! In all the three worlds, there is no one equal to You; how then could there be anyone greater than You?

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Thou art the Father of this world, moving and unmoving. Thou art to be adored by this world, Thou, the greatest Guru; (for) none there exists who is eal to Thee; how then could there be another superior to Thee in the three worlds, O Being of unealled power?

पिता Father? असि (Thou) art? लोकस्य of the world? चराचरस्य of the moving and unmoving? त्वम् Thou? अस्य of this? पूज्यः to be reserved? च and? गुरुः the Guru? गरीयान् weightier? न not? त्वत्समः eal to Thee? अस्ति is? अभ्यधिकः surpassing? कुतः whence? अन्यः other? लोकत्रये in the three worlds? अपि also? अप्रतिमप्रभाव O Being of unealled power.Commentary There exists none who is eal to Thee There cannot be two or more Isvaras. If there were? the world will not get on as it does now. All the Isvaras may not be of one mind? as they would all be independent of one another. What one wishes to create? another may wish to destroyWhen there does not exist one who is eal to Thee? how could there be one superior to TheeFather Creator. As the Lord is the creator of this world He is fit to be adored. He is the greatest Guru also. Therefore there is no one who is eal to the Lord.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
For Thou art the Father of all things movable and immovable, the Worshipful, the Master of Masters! In all the worlds there is none equal to Thee, how then superior, O Thou who standeth alone, Supreme.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
We see here that with a voice choked with emotion, Arjuna says with deep reverence towards Shri Krishna that You are the Father of this moving and non-moving world. Undoubtedly, the worlds of experience of the waking, dream, and deep sleep states also appear to exist only due to the manifestation of the Self through the gross, subtle, and causal vestures. The Self-consciousness that illumines all of them is one and the same everywhere. It is natural that, as Arjuna states, the Lord is endowed with matchless power, and when there is none even equal to Him, who can be greater than Him? Because such is the reality.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
You are the father of the world of the moving and unmoving;  You are the great preceptor of this universe; in the triad of worlds there is no one eal to You-How can there be anyone else superior ? - having greatness not comprehended.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
You are the father of this world, of all that moves and that does not move. You are its teacher and the one most worthy of reverence. There is none eal to You. How then could there be in the three worlds another greater than You, O Being of matchless greatness?

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
You are the Father of all beings moving and non-moving; to this (world) You are worthy of worship, the Teacher, and greater (than a teacher). There is none eal to You; how at all can there be anyone greater even in all the three worlds, O You or unrivalled power?

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having previously said, 'The multitude of my verbal offenses should be forgiven by You,' Arjuna now says, 'My offense should not be taken to heart by You, and even if it is, it must be tolerated by You' (since You are the Father, etc.) — this is expressed by 'yataḥ' (implied in 'For You are'). Due to the abundance of attributes, You are worthy of worship; because of being the instructor who initiates the tradition of Dharma and Self-knowledge, You are the Guru; and because of being greater than even the gurus of gurus (such as Hiranyagarbha), You are 'garīyān' (greater/more venerable). He establishes this very point through a question: 'kasmāt' (why?).

Fearing that there might be another God equal to Him, he says: 'na hi' (indeed not). If there were a plurality of Gods, each would have independence; there would be no reason for them to be in agreement, and if their opinions differed, one might desire to create while another might desire to destroy, which would lead to the collapse of worldly order. Therefore, the concept of multiple Gods is illogical — this is the meaning. He shows the impossibility of anyone being superior (abhyadhika) by using the a fortiori argument (kaimutika-nyaya): 'tvat-samaḥ' (equal to You). Introducing the reason for this, he explains: 'apratima' etc.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
You alone are the Father of this moving and non-moving world, You alone are worthy of worship, and You alone are the great Guru of gurus. O Lord of infinite power! In all the three worlds, there is no one equal to You, how then could there be anyone greater!

Commentary—'pitāsi lokasya carācarasya'—In the infinite universes, all moving beings such as humans, animals, birds, etc., and all non-moving beings such as trees, creepers, etc.—You are the Father who begets and sustains them all, You are their worshipable deity, and You are also the great Guru who instructs them—'tvamasya pūjyaśca gururgarīyān.' The phrase 'gururgarīyān' implies that wherever in human life one receives instruction from elders or gurus in temporal or spiritual matters, You are the supreme Guru of all those instructing gurus. That is, You are the sole source of all teaching and all knowledge.

'na tvatsamo'styabhyadhikaḥ kuto'nyo lokatraye'pyapratimaprabhāva'—In all the three worlds, when there is no one equal to You, when there never will be, and when there can never be, how can there be anyone more extraordinary than You? Therefore, Your power is matchless; it cannot be compared to anyone else.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
O Being of matchless greatness! You are the father of this world, of all that moves and does not move. You are the teacher of this world. Therefore You are the one most worthy of reverence in this world of mobile and immobile entities. There is none eal to You. How then could there be in the three worlds another greater than You?  No other being is eal to You in point of any attribute like compassion etc. How could there be any one greater?

Inasmuch as You are the father of all, the most worthy of reverence, teacher and exalted over all by virtue of attributes like compassion etc.,

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Asi, You are; pita, the Father, the Progenitor; lokasya, off all beings; cara-acarasya, moving and nonmoving. Not only are Yur are Father of this world, You are also pujyah, worthy of worship; since You are the guruh, Teacher; [He is the Teacher since He introduce the line of teachers of what is virtue and vice, and of the knowledge of the Self. And He is greater than a teacher because He is the teacher even of Hiranyagarbha and others.] gariyan, greater (than a teacher). How are You greater? In answer he says: Asti, there is; na, none other; tvat-samah, eal to You; for there is no possibility of two Gods. Because all dealings will come to naught if there be many Gods! When there is no possibility of another being eal toYou, kutah eva, how at all; can there be anyah, anyone; abhyadhikah, greater; api, even; loka-traye, in all the three worlds; apratima-prabhavah, O you of unrivalled power?
That by which something is measured is pratima. You who have no measure for Your power (prabhava) are a pratima-prabhavah. Apratima-prabhava means 'O You of limitless power!'
Since this is so,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'You are the Father...' and so on. You are worthy of worship and the Guru. You are known as sattvika (pure/righteous) in the Ashvamedha and Rajasuya sacrifices, because the sattvika virtues are established in You. Knowing You as such, I, an ordinary mortal, beg Your forgiveness.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He elaborates on His inconceivable power with the words 'You are the Father...' and so on. You are the Father, the creator, of this moving and non-moving world. You are also worthy of worship because of being the Lord of all (Sarveshvara). And You are the Guru because of being the instructor of scriptures. Therefore, in every way, You are 'garīyān', greater than a teacher. For this very reason, there is none equal to You; how then could there be anyone greater, even in the three worlds? O Lord of limitless power! When there is none even equal to You due to the absence of a second Supreme Lord, how could there be another superior to You? The meaning is that it is absolutely impossible in every way.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He describes His inconceivable power itself with the words 'You are the Father...' and so on. O Lord of matchless power, whose power has no comparison (apratima)! You are the Father, the creator, of this moving and non-moving world. Therefore, You are worthy of worship, and the Guru, and greater than even a guru. Thus, even in all the three worlds, there is no other equal to You, as there is no other Supreme Lord. How then can there be anyone greater than You?

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
I have acted highly improperly, therefore forgiveness must indeed be sought by me, and You must indeed forgive me. For You are the Father, the progenitor, of the entire assembly of living beings, moving and non-moving, and You are also worthy of worship. Since You are the Guru, the instructor of Dharma and Brahman, You are 'garīyān' (greater/more venerable). He states the reason for the Lord being greater: there is none equal to You, due to the absence of a second Ishvara (Lord). If there were multiple Lords, there would be no reason for them to be in agreement. If their minds differed, when one desired to destroy, another might desire to create, or when one desired to protect, another might desire to destroy, which would lead to the collapse of worldly order. Thus, polytheism is illogical — this is the sense. When even an equal to You is not possible, how indeed can there be anyone superior to You in all the three worlds? Or, the phrase 'how then another superior in the three worlds' shows the relation of cause and effect. There is no contradiction as the commentary is illustrative. O Lord of matchless power (apratima-prabhava)! That by which something is compared is 'pratima' (comparison). One whose power has no comparison is 'apratima-prabhava'. You alone are the Father, etc., of all — this is the meaning.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
'Even if forgiveness is sought by you, who has decided that I will forgive you? Seek shelter in someone else other than Me.' Inferring such an intention of the Lord, Arjuna addresses it in these two verses functioning in a cause-and-effect relationship. Thinking that the adjectives in the first verse substantiate His matchless power, he first says 'apratimaprabhāva' (O Lord of matchless power). Since the words Father, Guru, and Worshipful are relative terms, he applies the word 'loka' (world) to all of them, saying 'You are the Father of this world', etc. Indicating that His unconditional fatherhood and guru-hood are the reasons for His being most worthy of worship, he says 'ataḥ' (therefore). In order to explain the statement 'na tvatsamo'sti' which indicates that His greatness in being worthy of worship is unlimited, and because there is a great utility, he applies the word 'lokatraya' (three worlds) here, saying 'other than You in the three worlds'. Here, by the word 'lokatraya' (three worlds), either the three worlds designated as transient (kritaka), permanent (akritaka), and transient-permanent (kritakakritaka) are meant; or, by the etymology 'that by which what is not obtainable by other means of knowledge is perceived', the three Vedas are meant. Since equality involves difference, the phrase 'na tvatsamo'sti' itself denies any equality of another with the Lord, making the word 'anya' (other) redundant. To resolve this doubt, the word 'anya' is interpreted as 'other than You', meaning 'there is no other equal to You; You alone are equal to Yourself' (i.e. You are matchless). Thereby, for deities like Brahma and Shiva who are well-known to be different from the Lord due to their being effects (created), subject to karma, etc., in Vedic passages where they are mentioned with terms representing cause, etc., apparently suggesting equality with the Lord — such as 'hiranyagarbhah samavartatagre', 'ajasya nabhavadhyekamarpitam', 'yada tamastanna diva na ratrirna sanna casacchiva eva kevalah' — such terms are to be interpreted as referring to the Lord (Narayana) in accordance with the Brahmasutra principles like 'akashastallingat', 'pranastathanugamat', 'shastradrishtya tupadesho vamadevavat', 'sakshadapyavirodham jaiminih'. This is because of Upanishadic passages like 'esha sarvabhutantaratma'pahatapapma divyo deva eko narayanah' and 'eko ha vai narayana asin na brahma neshanah', which establish Him as the inner self of all and free from all sins, meaning that those deities do not possess even a trace of equality with the Lord. The phrase 'by any attribute' means: what to say of all auspicious attributes like being the cause of the world, bestower of liberation, etc.! By this, the views of equality, identity, or of Him being just another individual soul are to be understood as refuted.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
For seeking forgiveness, the existence of a relationship is necessary, therefore Arjuna says 'You are the Father...' and so on. You are the Father, the creator, of this moving and non-moving world, consisting of mobile and immobile entities, or of the Brahmins and Kshatriyas. And furthermore, You are 'garīyān' (greater), worthy of worship, the best among gods, and their seer, the Guru. Then, is there anyone equal to You? He answers in the negative. O Lord of matchless power (apratima-prabhava), whose greatness is beyond comparison! In all the three worlds, there is no other even equal to You, how then could there be anyone superior, by which You would be equal to him?

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He describes His immeasurability itself with the words 'You are the Father...' and so on. Since You are our Father, the offenses committed by us, who are like children, must indeed be forgiven by You — this is the meaning.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, of the moving and the nonmoving. You are its worshipable chief, the supreme spiritual master. No one is greater than You, nor can anyone be one with You. How then could there be anyone greater than You within the three worlds, O Lord of immeasurable power?

 The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is worshipable as a father is worshipable for his son. He is the spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedic instructions to Brahmā and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-gītā to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and any bona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendant in the line of disciplic succession stemming from Kṛṣṇa. Without being a representative of Kṛṣṇa, one cannot become a teacher or spiritual master of transcendental subject matter. The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects. He is of immeasurable greatness. No one can be greater than the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, because no one is equal to or higher than Kṛṣṇa within any manifestation, spiritual or material. Everyone is below Him. No one can excel Him. This is stated in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8): na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate The Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, has senses and a body like the ordinary man, but for Him there is no difference between His senses, His body, His mind and Himself. Foolish persons who do not perfectly know Him say that Kṛṣṇa is different from His soul, mind, heart and everything else. Kṛṣṇa is absolute; therefore His activities and potencies are supreme. It is also stated that although He does not have senses like ours, He can perform all sensory activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect nor limited. No one can be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him, and everyone is lower than Him. The knowledge, strength and activities of the Supreme Personality are all transcendental. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9) : janma karma ca me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so ’rjuna Whoever knows Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body, activities and perfection, after quitting his body, returns to Him and doesn’t come back again to this miserable world. Therefore one should know that Kṛṣṇa’s activities are different from others. The best policy is to follow the principles of Kṛṣṇa; that will make one perfect. It is also stated that there is no one who is master of Kṛṣṇa; everyone is His servant. The Caitanya-caritāmṛta ( Ādi 5.142) confirms, ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya: only Kṛṣṇa is God, and everyone else is His servant. Everyone is complying with His order. There is no one who can deny His order. Everyone is acting according to His direction, being under His superintendence. As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā, He is the cause of all causes.