Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yattadagre viṣamiva pariṇāme.amṛtopamam .
tatsukhaṃ sāttvikaṃ proktamātmabuddhiprasādajam

Word Meanings:
यत् - which
तत् - that
अग्रे - at first
विषम् - poison
इव - like
परिणामे - in the end
अमृतोपमम् - like nectar
तत् - that
सुखम् - pleasure
सात्त्विकम् - Sattvic
प्रोक्तम् - is declared
आत्मबुद्धिप्रसादजम् - born of the purity

Life Application:
Happiness like poison at first, nectar in end, born of self-clarity of intellect—is Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
That happiness which at first is like poison, but in the end is like nectar, born of the purity of one's own intellect, is declared to be Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
That which is like poison at first but in the end like nectar  that happiness is declared to be Sattvic, born of the purity of one's own mind due to Self-realisation.

यत् which? तत् that? अग्रे at first? विषम् poison? इव like? परिणामे in the end? अमृतोपमम् like nectar? तत् that? सुखम् pleasure? सात्त्विकम् Sattvic? प्रोक्तम् is declared (to be)? आत्मबुद्धिप्रसादजम् born of the purity of ones own mind due to Selfrealisation.Commentary Agree vishma iva In the beginning it is attended with much pain as one has to abandon the sensual objects and comforts and practise severe austerities and rigorous Sadhana. He has to undergo a severe ordeal when he practises Yama? Niyama? Tapas and various other vows. He has to cultivate dispassion or indifference to sensual pleasures. This gives him much pain at first. The practice of concentration and meditation also gives pain the beginning. Subjugation of the senses is also very troublesome. Nux vomica is very bitter. One feels much discomfort when he takes a mixture that contains nux vomica. But he derives much pleasure in the end when he gets vigour and good appetite and when his dyspepsia is cured. Even so the aspirant drinks the nectar of immortality in the end? attains the highest knowledge? rejoices in the,Self to his hearts content and enjoys supreme peace and eternal bliss.Proktam It is declared by the wise.Atmabuddhiprasadajam Born as purity of ones own intellect or born of the direct? perfect and clear knowledge of Brahman or the immortal? selfluminous? eternal and supreme Self or the Absolute. The individual self experiences Sattvic happiness when it realises union with the highest Self.The pleasure so born is Sattvic. (Cf.VI.1?2)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Which at first seems like poison but afterwards acts like nectar - that pleasure is Pure, for it is born of Wisdom.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The Sattvic happiness initially feels like poison because our minds are naturally outgoing, making self-discipline, contemplation, and study feel bitter and difficult. In the end, as the practice matures, it brings profound peace and contentment, comparable to nectar. This joy is born of the direct clarity (prasada) of the intellect focused on the Self (atmabuddhi), free from Rajasic and Tamasic impurities.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
[The happiness] which is like  poison  at its time but is like nectar at the time of its result-that happiness, born of serenity of the Soul and intellect, you must know to be of the Sattva (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That which is like a poison at first but becomes like elixir in the end, born from the serene state of mind focusing on the self - such pleasure is said to be Sattvika.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
That which is like poison in the beginning, but comparable to nectar in the end, and which, arises from the purity of one's intellect-that joy is spoken of as born of sattva.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The beginning stage of knowledge, detachment, and meditation involves intense effort, hence it is like poison (painful). The end result is like nectar due to the maturity of these practices. 'Atma-buddhi-prasada' means the purity of one's intellect resembling clean water, free from Rajas and Tamas.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
That happiness which at first is like poison but in the end is like nectar, born of the purity of one's own intellect focused on the Divine, is declared to be Sattvic.

Commentary: In the early stages of spiritual discipline (Sadhana), letting go of long-standing worldly attachments feels like drinking poison. Developing dispassion requires intense struggle and pain. However, when the intellect becomes clean and free from material desire (atmabuddhiprasada), it reflects the self-luminous Soul. This yields supreme, immortal peace and eternal bliss, which is compared to nectar.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
That pleasure, which 'at the beginning,' i.e., at the time of beginning of Yoga, is 'like poison,' i.e., is painful because it reires strenuous efforts and because the distinct nature of the self is not yet experienced, but which after long practice fructifies in the blissful experience of the self - that joy born of a serene state of mind 'focusing on the self' is Sattvika. The Buddhi concerning the self is 'Atama-buddhi.' When all objects are withdrawn from that Buddhi it becomes serene (Prasanna). The joy born of the experience of the self in its distinct nature, when all objects are withdrawn from the Buddhi, becomes 'like elixir'. That joy is said to be Sattvika.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.36–18.39 jointly): Explains the threefold classification of happiness. Sattvika joy feels like poison initially during arduous mental discipline, but yields the nectar of liberation in the end through the tranquility of Self-knowledge. Rajasa joy stems from sense-object contact, tasting like nectar at first but ending in sorrow like poison. Tamasa joy is delusive from start to finish, born of sleep, indolence, and negligence.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yat, that joy which is; iva, like; visam, poison, a source of pain; agre, in the beginning-when it first comes in the early stages of (acisition) of knowledge, detachment, meditation and absorption, since they involve great struggle; but amrtopamam, comparable to nectar; pariname, in the end, when it arises from the maturity of knowledge, detachment, etc.; and which atma-buddhi-prasadajam, arises from the purity (prasada), trasparence like water, of one's intellect (atma-buddhi); tat, that; sukham, joy; is proktam, spoken of, by the learned ones ;as sattvikam, born of sattva. Or, the phrase atma-buddhi-prasadajam may mean 'arising from the high degree of clearness of that atma-buddhi (knowledge of or connected with the Self)'; therefore it is born of sattva.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
In the beginning of Yoga, due to the need for great effort, the happiness is painful like poison; but in the end, upon the manifestation of the self, it is like nectar. This is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The happiness which in the beginning of knowledge, detachment, and samadhi feels like poison (due to intense self-restraint), but in the end (upon maturity) is like nectar, born of an intellect made pure and free from sleep and laziness, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The happiness which at first feels like poison due to the difficulty of mind-control, but is like nectar in the end, born of the clarity of the intellect freed from Rajas and Tamas, is spoken of as Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The happiness which at first is like poison due to the strain of beginning knowledge and meditation, but in the end is like nectar, arising from the mind becoming clear like pure water when freed from Rajas and Tamas, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The initial stage of spiritual practice is like poison (painful) because it requires abandoning deeply ingrained habits. The nectar in the end is the experience of the self-luminous Soul when all other objects are withdrawn from the intellect (Prasada).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The happiness which initially feels like poison because leaving material pleasure is painful like losing one's life, but in the end is sweet like nectar, born of the intellect freed from Rajas and Tamas, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The happiness which is like poison in the beginning due to the pain of restraining the mind and senses, but in the end is like nectar (joyful) due to the containment of mind, born of the purity of intellect, is Sattvic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
That which in the beginning may be just like poison but at the end is just like nectar and which awakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in the mode of goodness.

 In the pursuit of self-realization, one has to follow many rules and regulations to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate the mind on the self. All these procedures are very difficult, bitter like poison, but if one is successful in following the regulations and comes to the transcendental position, he begins to drink real nectar, and he enjoys life.