Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
na rūpamasyeha tathopalabhyate nānto na cādirna ca sampratiṣṭhā .
aśvatthamenaṃ suvirūḍhamūlaṃ asaṅgaśastreṇa dṛḍhena chittvā

Word Meanings:
न - not
रूपम् - form
अस्य - its
इह - here
तथा - as such
उपलभ्यते - is perceived
न - not
अन्तः - end
न - not
च - and
आदिः - origin
न - not
च - and
संप्रतिष्ठा - foundation or resting place
अश्वत्थम् - Asvattha
एनम् - this
सुविरूढमूलम् - firmrooted
असङ्गशस्त्रेण - with the strong weapon of non-attachment
दृढेन - strong
छित्त्वा - having cut asunder.

Life Application:
Cut down this firm-rooted tree of attachment using the strong axe of detachment, seeking the primal source.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Its form is not perceived here as such, neither its end, nor its origin, nor its foundation. Having cut this firm-rooted Ashvattha tree with the strong weapon of detachment...

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Its form is not perceived here as such, neither its end nor its origin, nor its foundation nor resting place: having cut asunder this firmly rooted peepul tree with the strong axe of non-attachment.

न not? रूपम् form? अस्य its? इह here? तथा as such? उपलभ्यते is perceived? न not? अन्तः (its) end? न not? च and? आदिः (its) origin? न not? च and? संप्रतिष्ठा foundation or resting place? अश्वत्थम् Asvattha? एनम् this? सुविरूढमूलम् firmrooted? असङ्गशस्त्रेण with the axe of nonattachment? दृढेन strong? छित्त्वा having cut asunder.Commentary The idea is continued in the next verse.So long as one is under the sway of ignorance? he cannot understand the form of this tree? its end? origin and foundation (middle). O Arjuna Thou mayest perhaps consider that such a huge tree cannot be uprooted by any means whatever. It is not so. However firmly rooted it may be? it can be cut by the powerful axe of nnattachment or dispassion within the twinkling of an eye.After cutting this tree you will have to look within? meditate on the Self and behold the Supreme.Tatha As such As described above. Is it necessary to pull down castles in the air or to break the horns of a hare or to pluck a flower growing in the sky or to get butter from the milk of a tortoise or oil from stone Similarly? O Arjuna? there is no reality in this tree. Therefore why should you entertain any fear as to whether it may be uprooted or not Its form as such is not perceived by anybody here it is like a dream or a mirage or an imaginary city in the sky formed by the clouds or caused by a juggler. It appears and disappears. This tree has DrishtaNashtaSvarupa like the mirage. That object which is destroyed when one beholds it is DrishtaNashta. Nobody has perceived the end? the origin or the foundation of this illusory tree. No one can say that it has arisen from such and such a place or point.Samsara or the peepul tree is inveterately deeprooted. You will have to struggle hard to uproot it with its seed or the selfreproducing deep root.Asanga Dispassion? freedom from attachment to children? wealth and the world.Dridhena Strong. You will have to cut the tree with a strong axe which is sharpened again and again on the whetstone of the practice of discrimination. Further your mind should be turned towards the Supreme Being with the strong determination that you can attain eternal bliss only in Him and that He is the ony Reality.The desire for sensual pleasure is Sanga. Its opposite (dispassion) is Asanga. Renunciation of the three kinds of Eshanas (desires)? viz.? children? wealth and the world (PutraVittaLokeshana) is Asanga. Just as the axe cuts the tree? so also dispassion cuts this tree of Samsara. Hence dispassion is termed an axe. Cutting the tree of Samsara is annihilation of egoism? ignorance? latent tendencies? and renunciation of the fruits of all actions? through the practice of dispassion? control of the mind and the senses? etc. (Cf.VII.14)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
In this world its true form is not known, neither its origin nor its end, and its strength is not understood., until the tree with its roots striking deep into the earth is hewn down by the sharp axe of non-attachment.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Its form is not perceived here as such, neither its end, nor its origin, nor its foundation. Having cut this firm-rooted Ashvattha tree with the strong weapon of detachment...

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The nature of this is not perceived in that manner, nor its end, nor its beginning and nor its centre (the middle).  Cutting this holy Fig-tree-with its firmly and variedly grown roots-by means of the sharp (or strong) exe of non-attachment;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Its form as such is not perceived here, nor its end, nor its beginning, nor its support. Having cut off this firm-rooted Asvattha with the strong axe of detachment৷৷.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Its form is not perceived here in that way; nor its end, nor beginning, nor continuance, After felling this Peepul whose roots are well developed, with the strong sword of detachment-;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that Lord Vishnu is the beginning, end, and middle of the universe, and He is not perceived as such by ordinary beings. Detachment from attachments (Asanga) combined with knowledge is the weapon. Cutting the tree means analyzing the creation through discrimination, which leads to understanding Brahman at the root.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the true nature of this tree, which is like a dream or mirage, cannot be perceived. It has no beginning, end, or middle because of the beginningless cycle of ignorance. One must uproot this firmly rooted tree by repeated practice of discrimination and dispassion.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Its form is not perceived here as such; nor its end, nor beginning, nor continuance. Therefore, having cut this firmly rooted Ashvattha tree of Samsara with the strong sword of non-attachment...

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that to a person engaged in worldly enjoyments, the world seems real and permanent. However, when analyzed with discrimination, its real form is not perceived because it is constantly changing and lacks any permanent existence. It has no beginning, end, or middle from the perspective of time and space. Yet, it appears extremely firm-rooted due to the Jiva's identification, sense of mine, and desire (Tadatma, Mamata, and Kamana). To cut this tree means to sever all attachment, egoism, and expectations from the material world using the strong weapon of detachment (Asanga). This is achieved when one realizes that the self is eternal and distinct from the transient world.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The form of this tree, having its origin above, i.e., in the four-faced Brahma and branches below in the sense that man forms the crest through continual lineage therefrom, and also having its branches extended above and below by actions done in the human state and forming secondary roots - that form of the tree is not understood by people immersed in Samsara. Only this much is perceived:  'I am a man, the son of Devadatta, the father of Yajnadatta; I have property appropriate to these conditions'. Likewise, it is not understood that its destruction can be brought about by detachment from enjoyments which are based on Gunas. Similarly it is not perceived that attachment to the Gunas alone is the beginning of this (tree). Again, it is not perceived that the basis of this tree is founded on ignorance which is the misconception of self as non-self. Ignorance alone is the basis of this tree, since in it alone the tree is fixed. 

This Asvattha, described above, firm-rooted, i.e., the roots of which are firm and manifold, is to be cut off by the strong axe of detachment, namely, detachment from the sense objects composed of the three Gunas. This can be forged through perfect knowledge. As one gains detachment from sense-objects, one should seek and find out the goal from which nobody ever returns.

How does this attachment to sense-objects, which consists of the Gunas and erroneous knowledge forming its cause, cease to exist?

Sri Krsna now answers:

One should seek 'refuge (Prapadyet) in the Primal Person' alone in order to overcome this ignorance. One should seek refuge (Prapadyeta) in Him who is primal, namely, the beginning of all entities, as stated in the following text:  'With Me as the Lord, the Prakrti gives birth to all that which moves, and that which does not move' (9.10), 'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8), and 'There is nothing higher than Me, O Arjuna' (7.7). From Me, the creator of everything, has streamed forth this ancient activity, continuing from time immermorial, of attachment to sense-objects consisting of Gunas. This has been declared already by Me:  'For this divine Maya of Mine consisting of the Gunas is hard to break through. But those who take refuge in me alone shall pass beyond this Maya' (7.14).

Or a variant of this stanza is 'prapadya iyatah pravrttih' (in place of 'prapadyet yatah pravrittih'). This gives the sense that this discipline of taking refuge in the Supreme Person for dispelling of ignorance has continued from a distant past. The tendencies of ancient persons seeking liberation are also ancient. The purport is this:  The ancient liberation-seekers, taking refuge in Me alone, were released from bondage. [This can be taken to mean that Prapatti or taking refuge in the Lord had originated in the Bhakti tradition of the Sri-Vaisnavites from ancient sages i.e., from the Alvars who preceded  Ramanuja by several centuries. It is not a creation of Ramanuja].

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 15.3–15.5 jointly): Na rupam.,  upto avyayam tat.  Cutting this [tree] etc.  Here the action  [of cutting] mentioned with regard to the alified one  [viz৷৷ the tree]  appropriates for itself, the place  (or word) of alification [viz. the root below],  just as in the case of the injunction :  'Let the man-with-stick recite the Praisa hymns.  By this way  [we get the meaning] :  'Let him cut off the roots tha are grown below.  That Abode :  The absolutely  Tranil One.  The changeless Abode is nothing but That.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
But, asya, its-of this Tree of the World which has been described; rupam, form, as it has been presented; na, is not at all; upalabhyate, perceived; iha, here; tatha, in that way. For, being like a dream, water in a mirage, jugglery, an imaginary city seen in the sky, it is by nature destroyed no sooner than it is seen. Therefore, na, there exists neither; its antah, end, limit, termination; so also, neither; its beginning. It is not comprehended by anyone that it comes into existence beginning from any definite point. Its sampratistha, continuance, the middle state, too, is not perceived by anyone.
Chittva, after felling, uprooting, together with its seeds; enam, this, above described; asvattham, Peepul, the Tree of the World; suvirudha-mulam, whose roots (mula) are well (su) developed (virudham); drdhena, with the strong-hardened by a resolute mind directed towards the supreme Self, and sharpened on the stone of repeated practice of discrimination; asanga-sastrena, sword of detachment-detachment means turn ing away from the desire for progeny, wealth and the worlds; with that sword of detachment-.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha explains that the form of this tree is not perceived in the described way because it is constantly changing. Vishnu is the beginning, end, and middle of the universe. The weapon of dispassion (Asanga) combined with discrimination is used to cut the tree, which means analyzing the dependencies of creation to realize Brahman as the source.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that the true nature of this world as declared in the Vedas is not perceived by those deluded by Maya. The tree is called Ashvattha because it is transient, but its Jiva-created impressions are very firm. One must sever this Jiva-created portion of Samsara with the weapon of deep detachment (Asanga) to search for the supreme abode of Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that the form of this tree of Samsara is not perceived as such because it is illusory like a dream or mirage. It has no end, beginning, or middle in itself. One must uproot this firmly rooted tree by the weapon of detachment (Asanga), which means turning away from the desires for progeny, wealth, and heaven, through the practice of discrimination and renouncing all actions.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the form of this tree is not perceived by Jivas because it is transient. It is beginningless and endless, and its middle state is also not understood. Since it is difficult to cut and brings only misery, one must cut this firmly rooted tree with the strong weapon of detachment (Asanga), which means the abandonment of 'I' and 'mine'.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that the description of Samsara is to show its indefinable nature, like a dream or mirage, which exists only to be destroyed. It has no beginning, end, or middle. The secondary roots are desires, actions, and latent impressions. The weapon of detachment (Asanga) is developed by focusing the mind on the Supreme Lord and repeatedly practicing discrimination.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the true cosmic form of the tree is not understood by people in Samsara who only see physical relationships ('I am a man, father, etc.'). The end refers to complete dissolution through dispassion. The origin is attachment to Gunas, and the foundation is ignorance. One must cut this tree with the strong weapon of detachment born of correct knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that those attached to worldly actions do not perceive the divine, playful nature of this tree. It has no end because it is eternal as the Lord's play, and no beginning because the Lord is beginningless. One must cut this worldly tree with the weapon of detachment from corrupt sense-objects to seek the divine reality.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the tree is illusory like a snake on a rope; its true form is not perceived by those who possess correct knowledge. It has no beginning or end because its cause (ignorance) is beginningless. It has no foundation because it is not a modification of Brahman. One must dissolve this tree through the practice of non-dual meditation (Samadhi), which is the weapon of detachment (Asanga).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with determination one must cut down this strongly rooted tree with the weapon of detachment.

 It is now clearly stated that the real form of this banyan tree cannot be understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, the extension of the real tree is at the other end. When entangled with the material expansions of the tree, one cannot see how far the tree extends, nor can one see the beginning of this tree. Yet one has to find out the cause. “I am the son of my father, my father is the son of such-and-such a person, etc.” By searching in this way, one comes to Brahmā, who is generated by the Garbhodaka-śāyī Viṣṇu. Finally, in this way, when one reaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that is the end of research work. One has to search out that origin of this tree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the association of persons who are in knowledge of that Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this false reflection of reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connection and actually become situated in the real tree. The word asaṅga is very important in this connection because the attachment for sense enjoyment and lording it over the material nature is very strong. Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion of spiritual science based on authoritative scriptures, and one must hear from persons who are actually in knowledge. As a result of such discussion in the association of devotees, one comes to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then the first thing one must do is surrender to Him. The description of that place whence having gone one never returns to this false reflected tree is given here. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the original root from whom everything has emanated. To gain the favor of that Personality of Godhead, one has only to surrender, and this is a result of performing devotional service by hearing, chanting, etc. He is the cause of the extension of the material world. This has already been explained by the Lord Himself. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: “I am the origin of everything.” Therefore to get out of the entanglement of this strong banyan tree of material life, one must surrender to Kṛṣṇa. As soon as one surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa, one becomes detached automatically from this material extension.