Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
kleśo.adhikatarasteṣāmavyaktāsaktacetasām ||
avyaktā hi gatirduḥkhaṃ dehavadbhiravāpyate

Word Meanings:
क्लेशः - the trouble
अधिकतरः - greater
तेषाम् - of those
अव्यक्तासक्तचेतसाम् - whose minds are set
अव्यक्ता - the unmanifested
हि - for
गतिः - goal
दुःखम् - pain
देहवद्भिः - by the embodied
अवाप्यते - is reached.

Life Application:
Recognize that path of the unmanifest is difficult for embodied beings, requiring intense self-discipline.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
But for those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, the trouble is greater; because the path of the unmanifested is reached with difficulty by the embodied.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Greater is their trouble whose minds are set on the unmanifested; for the goal; the unmanifested, is very hard for the embodied to reach.

क्लेशः the trouble? अधिकतरः (is) greater? तेषाम् of those? अव्यक्तासक्तचेतसाम् whose minds are set on the unmanifested? अव्यक्ता the unmanifested? हि for? गतिः goal? दुःखम् pain? देहवद्भिः by the embodied? अवाप्यते is reached.Commentary Worshippers of the Saguna (alified) and the Nirguna (unalified) Brahman reach the same goal. But the latter path is very hard and arduous? because the aspirant has to give up attachment to the body from the very beginning of his spiritual practice.The embodied Those who identify themselves with their bodies. Identification with the body is Dehabhimana. The imperishable Brahman is very hard to reach for those who are attached to their bodies. Further? it is extremely difficult to fix the resltess mind on the formless and attributeless Brahman. Contemplation on the imperishable? attributeless Brahman demands a very sharp? onepointed and subtle intellect. The Upanishad says Drisyate tu agraya buddhya sukshmaya sukshmadarsibhih -- It is seen by subtle seers through their subtle intellect.He who meditates on the unmanifested should possess the four means. Then he will have to approach a Guru who is well versed in the scriptures and who is also established in Brahman. He will have to hear the Truth from him? then reflect and meditate on It.He who realises the Nirguna (attributeless) Brahman attains eternal bliss or Selfrealisation or Kaivalya (Moksha) which is preceded by the destruction of ignorance with its effects. He who realises the Saguna Brahman (Brahman with attributes) goes to Brahmaloka and enjoys all the wealth and powers of the Lord. He then gets initiation into the mysteries of the Absolute from Hiranyagarbha and without any effort and without the practice of hearing? reflection and meditation attains? through the grace of the Lord alone? the same state as attained by those who have realised the Nirguna Brahman. Through the knowledge of the Self? ignorance and its effects,are destroyed in the case of the worshippers of the Saguna Brahman also.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
But they who thus fix their attention on the Absolute and Impersonal encounter greater hardships, for it is difficult for those who possess a body to realise Me as without one.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Having declared that the worshippers of both the Saguna and Nirguna reach the same goal, Lord Krishna tries to compare the two paths, which are in fact incomparable and possess equal efficacy and merits. The Lord says that the worshippers of the Unmanifest suffer more trouble than the worshippers of the Saguna. If this statement is understood only in this manner and form, it would appear that it not only supports Saguna worship but also definitely censures Nirguna worship. Such an erroneous and misleading interpretation would make the Gita a scripture that contradicts the eternal knowledge propounded by the Upanishads. There are some vocal advocates of the path of devotion who quote only this half-verse to deceive the gullible and devout public. The Lord Himself clarifies the meaning of the first line in the second line. Why do the worshippers of the Unmanifest suffer greater trouble? The Lord explains that the goal of the Unmanifest is attained with difficulty by the embodied. The word to be examined in this verse is 'dehavadbhih', meaning 'by the embodied'. Usually, the literal meaning of this word is accepted. But if we look at the other natural side of this interpretation, the inconsistency of such an meaning will become clear. If all embodied human beings can only worship the Saguna (with form), it would mean that meditation on the formless would be possible only after leaving the body. Therefore, Sri Adi Shankaracharya, clarifying this, writes that 'dehavadbhih' means 'dehabhimanavadbhih', i.e., the embodied refers to those who have a very strong identification with the body. Those who consider the body to be their own self, being attached to it, always live a life of sense-enjoyment. For such sense-attached persons, it is virtually impossible to meditate on the infinite, formless, and all-pervading Truth. Just as a frail old man with failing eyesight and trembling hands may find it very difficult to thread a needle, similarly, a person with an agitated, restless intellect that craves sense-enjoyment can never achieve the infinite glory of the Self, which transcends all names and forms. The point is that there is no trouble in the worship of the Unmanifest itself, but rather it appears troublesome to those who identify themselves with the body. In short, for the vast majority of seekers, meditating on the manifest form of the Lord in the world is simpler and more beneficial. If a person performs service to the world considering it as worship of God, then gradually his body-attachment and thirst for sense-enjoyment come to an end, and the mind becomes so pure and subtle that it becomes capable of meditating on the formless, unmanifest, and imperishable Truth. The conduct of the worshippers of the Imperishable (Akshara) will be described in the concluding part of this chapter. However, now, the spiritual practices useful for the worshippers of the Saguna are being described.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
(But) the trouble is much more for them, who have their mind fixed on the Unmanifest; for the Unmanifest-goal is attained with difficulty by men, bearing body.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Greater is the difficulty of those whose minds are thus attached to the unmanifest. For the way of the unmanifest is hard to reach by embodied beings.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
For them who have their minds attached to the Unmanifested the struggle is greater; for, the Goal which is the Unmanifest is attained with difficulty by the embodied ones.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Then how is it that Your worshippers are superior?' To this, He says: 'klesha...' The Unmanifest goal (path) is attained with difficulty. 'Gati' means path. The meaning is that the path of attaining Me through the worship of the Unmanifest is attained with difficulty. There is no direct perception of the Unmanifest without the combination of means such as intense worship, restraint of all senses, equal-mindedness towards all, devotion to the welfare of all beings, very pure conduct, and perfect devotion to Lord Vishnu. Without that, there is no grace of Lord Vishnu. Even if that direct perception is achieved, without proper worship of the Lord, liberation is not attained. However, without the worship of the Unmanifest, liberation indeed occurs for the worshippers of the Lord; thus, the idea is that this path is extremely troublesome. Nevertheless, for those who have directly realized the Unmanifest, the worship of the Lord becomes easy, and that is the only purpose. Even there, if one worships the Lord with the same effort that is spent in the direct realization of the Unmanifest, or even with less, then the direct realization of the Lord occurs; thus, the second path (devotion) is superior. If there is a deficiency in sense restraint etc., even for an intense worshipper, the Goddess (Sri/Prakriti) does not show great grace. The Lord, however, Himself gives those means with effort to a devotee; thus, there is ease in the worship of the Lord for His devotees. In the other path, the trouble is greater. All this is indicated by the words 'paryupasate' (they worship), 'sanniyamya' (restraining), and the comparative suffix 'adhikatarah' (greater). It is said in the Samaveda, Madhuchanda branch: 'Those devotees who are highly devoted to Vishnu, self-controlled, of righteous conduct, and worship Her with equal-mindedness, to them the Goddess is visible, not to others. Being highly devoted to Vishnu, She protects them and destroys all obstacles. Knowing and worshipping that Vasudeva, one attains supreme peace from Him.' Also, it is said in the Samaveda, Ayasya branch: 'The Lord will be pleased along with the Unmanifest (Lakshmi). There is no doubt that His grace is obtained to that extent. The Great Lord is not pleased by Her grace alone. But when He is pleased, everyone's pleasure is assured. Though there may be excess of worship, He alone is the giver of attributes and He alone is the giver of liberation, not the Unmanifest or anyone else.' In the Mokshadharma, there is the statement of Sri: 'Desiring my state of selfhood, they strive for the Supreme Self.' And, 'In one who is always established in righteousness, of great intellect, devoted to Brahman, truthful, humble, and charitable, I always reside.' The Supreme is indeed Brahman, which is higher than the Mahat. Thus it is logically explained by the Lord (in Brahma Sutras: 'If it be said that it refers to the Unmanifest, we say no, because of the reference to the three, etc.'). From the masculine gender of the word 'tam', this is established. Being higher than the Mahat indeed belongs to that which is beyond the Unmanifest. Thus in the Agniveshya branch: 'Without beginning and end, higher than the Mahat, eternal.' 'The Supreme Lord is invoked as greater than the Mahat.' The form of the Unmanifest is not denied by the Lord, as it is established in the Mahabharata etc. In the Brahma Sutras like 'Sarirarupakavinyastagrihiter...', the Samkhya-celebrated Pradhana is denied, and only the Vedic Unmanifest (Sri/Prakriti) is affirmed. Thus in the Saukarayana Sruti: 'The Unmanifest is the bodily form of the bodiless Vishnu, from whom the dear birth of the universe takes place.' The special feature is that the Goddess (Sri) quickly gives great wealth to those of good vows, not the Lord. In the Rigveda Khila: 'Knowing the Goddess who is golden-coloured, lotus-handed, ruler of all, and who pervades the inert creation, She indeed gives great glory to those of good vows within a few months, not the Lord.'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
'How is it so even among the worshippers of Saguna?' To this he says, 'But...' Adverting to the fact that the worship of the Imperishable (Akshara) is difficult and the other worship (of Saguna) is easy, He says: 'klesha...' The struggle is indeed greater compared to others, namely the dualists who are full of desires. Thinking of the cause for the greatness of their trouble, He qualifies them as 'deha...'. 'Avyaktasaktacetasam' means those whose minds are attached or absorbed in the extremely subtle, attributeless Imperishable. The Lord Himself states the reason for the greater trouble of the worshippers of the Imperishable: 'avyakta...' It is attained with pain, i.e., with great difficulty, because of the necessity of abandoning identification with the body. To explain how they conduct themselves, he says, 'akshara...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Greater is the difficulty of those whose minds are attached to the Unmanifest; for the path of the Unmanifest is reached with difficulty by the embodied.

Commentary - 'klesho'dhikatarasteshamavyaktasaktacetasam' - 'those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest' - this adjective is used here for those seekers who consider the Nirguna (attribute-less) worship to be superior, but whose minds are not yet absorbed in the Nirguna principle. For a seeker to be absorbed in the Principle, three things are required: interest, faith, and eligibility. By hearing the glory of the Nirguna principle from the scriptures and gurus, some interest is indeed generated in them (due to having a mind attached to the formless and considering Nirguna worship as superior) and they also start the practice with faith; but due to a lack of dispassion (vairagya) and body-consciousness (dehabhimana), those whose minds do not enter the Principle are referred to here by the term 'avyaktasaktacetasam'.

In the twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth verses of the sixth chapter, the Lord has stated that a 'brahmabhuta' seeker, i.e., one who is established in non-differential identification with Brahman, attains Brahman easily (happily). But here in this verse, by the words 'kleshah adhikatarah' (greater is the trouble), it is clarified that the minds of these seekers are not completely absorbed in the Nirguna principle like the brahmabhuta seekers. Therefore, they are not called 'absorbed' (avishta) in the unmanifest but rather 'attached' (asakta) in mind. The implication is that while the attachment of these seekers is actually to the body, upon hearing the glory of the unmanifest, they consider Nirguna worship as superior and become attached to it; whereas attachment can only happen to the body, not to the unmanifest.

In the fifth verse of the thirteenth chapter, the word 'avyaktam' is used in the sense of Prakriti (nature), and at several other places, it is used for Prakriti; but here in the term 'avyaktasaktacetasam', the meaning of 'avyakta' is not Prakriti, but rather the Nirguna-Nirakara (attribute-less, formless) Brahman. The reason is that in the first verse of this very chapter, Arjuna questioned about the Saguna-Sakara (with attributes and form) aspect with the word 'tvam' (You) and the Nirguna-Nirakara aspect with the word 'avyaktam' (unmanifest). The object of worship is also the Supreme Lord, and not Prakriti; because Prakriti and its effects are to be abandoned. Therefore, in response to that question, the Lord used the word 'avyakta' (as opposed to the manifest form) in the sense of the Nirguna-Nirakara form. Therefore, since there is no context of Prakriti here, the word 'avyakta' cannot be taken to mean Prakriti.

In the fourth verse of the ninth chapter, the word 'avyaktamurtina' has come for the Saguna-Nirakara (with attributes but formless) form. In such a situation, a question may arise: why should we not take the meaning of 'avyaktasaktacetasam' here also as those whose minds are attached to the 'Saguna-Nirakara'? But even that meaning cannot be taken; because in the first verse of this chapter, in Arjuna's question, the word 'tvam' is for Saguna-Sakara and the word 'aksharam' along with 'avyaktam' is for Nirguna-Nirakara. What is Brahman? In response to this question of Arjuna, in the third verse of the eighth chapter, the Lord has already stated that the supreme Akshara is Brahman, meaning that there also, the word 'aksharam' was used for Nirguna-Nirakara. Therefore, the Nirguna Brahman about which Arjuna questioned using the words 'avyaktam aksharam', in response to that, the word 'avyakta' here (with 'akshara' as an adjective) must be taken as Nirguna-Nirakara Brahman only, and not Saguna-Nirakara.

The import of the term 'klesho'dhikatarah' is that those Nirguna worshippers whose minds are not absorbed in the Nirguna principle experience special trouble or difficulty in their practice due to body-consciousness. Secondarily, the meaning of this term is that all Nirguna worshippers, from the initial stage of practice to the final stage, experience greater difficulty than Saguna worshippers.

Special Note: Now, the ease of Saguna worship and the difficulties of Nirguna worship are analyzed:

'The Easiness of Saguna Worship'

1. In Saguna worship, as the object of worship has qualities and form, the seeker's mind and senses have the support of the Lord's form, name, sports (leela), and stories. Being devoted to the Lord, his mind and senses are engaged with relative ease in contemplating the Lord's form and sports, listening to His stories, and in His service and worship (Gita 8.14). Therefore, the possibility of worldly thoughts in him is very low.

2. Worldly attachment itself causes trouble in spiritual practice. But the Saguna worshipper depends on the Lord alone to overcome this. He believes only in the power of the Lord. Just as a kitten depends entirely on its mother, similarly, this seeker also depends on the Lord. The Lord Himself takes care of him (Gita 9.22): 'Listen, O Sage, I tell you with assurance: those who worship Me abandoning all other support, I always protect them just as a mother protects her child' (Ramacharitamanas 3.43.2-3). Thus, his worldly attachment is easily eradicated.

3. For such worshippers, the Lord in the Gita has promised swift attainment of Himself using terms like 'nachirat' (without delay) (Gita 12.7).

4. The darkness of ignorance in the Saguna worshippers is destroyed by the Lord Himself (Gita 10.11).

5. Their deliverance is done by the Lord Himself (Gita 12.7).

6. If any subtle defect remains in such worshippers, the omniscient Lord, because of their dependence on Him, graciously removes it (Gita 18.58, 66).

7. The worship of such worshippers is the worship of the Lord Himself. The Lord is ever complete. Therefore, since there is not the slightest doubt in the completeness of the Lord, faith arises in them easily. Having faith, they become eternally devoted to the Lord. Hence, the Lord Himself bestows upon them the yoga of intellect (buddhi-yoga), by which they attain the Lord (Gita 10.10).

8. Such worshippers believe the Lord to be extremely merciful. Therefore, taking shelter under His grace, they cross over all difficulties. This is why their practice becomes easy, and by the strength of the Lord's grace, they quickly attain Him (Gita 18.56, 58).

9. A human being naturally has the habit of performing actions (Gita 3.5); therefore, a devotee only has to change his attitude (bhava) while performing his actions for the Lord, while the actions remain the same. Thus, by performing actions for the Lord, the devotee is easily liberated from the bondage of action (Gita 18.46).

10. Even if there is respect for material objects in the heart, if they engage in the service of living beings, they do not find it difficult to renounce objects. For deserving recipients, renouncing objects is even easier. And for the sake of the Lord, renunciation of objects can happen very easily.

11. In this practice, discrimination (viveka) and dispassion (vairagya) are not as necessary as love and faith. For instance, despite the presence of hatred towards the Kauravas, the Lord appeared merely upon Draupadi's call, because she considered the Lord as her own. The Lord only looks at the love and faith of the devotee towards Him, not at his defects. Establishing a relationship of intimacy with the Lord is not as difficult (since intimacy from the Lord's side is self-proven) as it is difficult to become a worthy recipient.

'The Difficulties of Nirguna Worship'

1. In Nirguna worship, since the object of worship is attribute-less and formless, there is no support for the seeker's mind and senses. Due to the lack of support and dispassion, there is a higher possibility of the senses contemplating worldly objects.

2. The greater the attachment to the body, the more trouble is felt in the practice. The Nirguna worshipper tries to remove it through discrimination (viveka). Practicing by taking shelter of discrimination, he gives importance to his own strength of practice. Just as a baby monkey (depending on its own strength) clings to its mother and believes its own grip protects it, similarly, this seeker believes in his progress by the strength of his own practice (Gita 18.51-53). For this reason, in the Ramacharitamanas, the Lord has compared him to a grown-up son: 'A wise person is like my grown-up son, while an unpretentious devotee is like an infant child' (3.43.4).

3. In the context of attaining the goal by the Jnana-yogis, the word 'achirena' (soon) in the thirty-ninth verse of the fourth chapter is used for the attainment of peace after the knowledge of Truth, and not for the attainment of the knowledge of Truth itself.

4. The Nirguna worshippers attain the knowledge of Truth by themselves (Gita 13.34).

5. They deliver themselves (attain the Nirguna principle) by themselves (Gita 5.24).

6. If any deficiency remains in such worshippers, they experience that deficiency late, and they also find it difficult to identify the deficiency correctly. Yes, once they identify the deficiency correctly, they too can remove it.

7. In the thirty-fourth verse of the fourth chapter and the seventh verse of the thirteenth chapter, the Lord has commanded the Jnana-yogis to worship the Guru to obtain knowledge. Therefore, in Nirguna worship, there is indeed a need for a Guru; but if the completeness of the Guru is not certain, or if the Guru is not complete, it is difficult to have stable faith, and there is also a possibility of delay in the success of practice.

8. Such worshippers consider the object of worship to be attribute-less, formless, and indifferent (udaseena). Therefore, they do not experience the Lord's grace in that manner. They experience difficulty in removing obstacles that come in the way of attaining the Truth solely on the strength of their own practice. As a result, there may also be delay in the attainment of the Truth.

9. A Jnana-yogi theoretically offers his actions to Prakriti; but his actions can be offered to Prakriti only when complete discrimination is awakened. If there is even the slightest lack of discrimination, the actions will not be offered to Prakriti, and the seeker will remain bound in the bondage of action due to the presence of egoism of doership (kartritva-abhimana).

10. As long as there is the slightest respect for objects in the seeker's mind, and I-ness and My-ness (ahanta-mamata) in the body and name called one's own, it remains difficult for him to regard objects as illusory (mayamaya) and renounce them.

11. This seeker can only attain the Truth when he becomes worthy. To become worthy, discrimination and intense dispassion are required, which are difficult to attain as long as attachment exists.

'avyaktā hi gatirduḥkhaṃ dehavadbhiravāpyate' - the words 'dehi', 'dehabhrit' etc. are generally taken to mean 'the embodied human being'. According to the context, they can also mean 'the individual soul (jiva)' and 'the Self (Atman)'. Here the term 'dehavadbhih' should be taken to mean 'men possessing body-consciousness'; because for the Nirguna worshippers, the term 'avyaktasaktacetasam' has appeared in the first half of this verse, which indicates that although they consider the Nirguna worship to be superior, their minds are not absorbed in the Nirguna principle due to body-consciousness. It is due to body-consciousness alone that they experience greater trouble in their practice. In Nirguna worship, body-consciousness is the main obstacle - 'All defects manifest in one who is conscious of the body'. To draw attention to this obstacle, the Lord has used the term 'dehavadbhih'. To remove this body-consciousness, the Lord (without Arjuna even asking) spoke the thirteenth and fourteenth chapters. Even in them, the first verse of the thirteenth chapter was spoken only to eradicate body-consciousness. The attainment of the Nirguna-Nirakara form of Brahman is referred to here as 'avyaktah gatih'. The state of ordinary human beings resides in the manifest, i.e., in the body. Therefore, they experience difficulty in being established in the unmanifest. If a seeker does not consider himself to possess a body, then his establishment in the unmanifest can occur easily and quickly.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The individual self meditated upon by those who follow the path of the 'Aksara' (the Imperishable) is thus described:  It cannot be 'defined' in terms indicated by expressions like gods and men etc., for It is different from the body; It is 'imperceptible' through the senses such as eyes; It is 'omnipresent and unthinkable,' for though It exists everywhere in bodies such as those of gods and others, It cannot be conceived in terms of those bodies, as It is an entity of an altogether different kind; It is 'common to all beings' i.e., alike in all beings but different from the bodily forms distinguishing them; It is 'immovable' as It does not move out of Its unie nature, being unmodifiable, and therefore eternal. Such aspirants are further described as those who, 'subduing their senses' like the eye from their natural operations, look upon all beings of different forms as 'eal' by virtue of their knowledge of the sameness of the nature of the selves as knowers in all. Therefore they are not given 'to take pleasure in the misfortune of others,' as such feelings proceed from one's identification with one's own special bodily form.

Those who meditate on the Imperishable Principle (individual self) in this way, even they come to Me. It means that they also realise their essential self, which, in respect of freedom from Samsara, is like My own Self. So Sri Krsna will declare later on:  'Partaking of My nature' (14.2). Also the Sruti says:  'Untainted, he attains supreme eality' (Mun. U., 3.1.3).

Likewise He will declare the Supreme Brahman as being distinct from the freed self which is without modification and is denoted by the term 'Imperishable' (Aksara), and is described as unchanging (Kutastha). 'The Highest Person is other than this Imperishable' (15.16 - 17). But in the teaching in Aksara-vidya 'Now that higher science by which that Aksara is known' (Mun. U., 1.5) the entity that is designated by the term Aksara is Supreme Brahman Himself; for He is the source of all beings, etc. Greater is the difficulty of those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest. The path of the unmanifest is a psychosis of the mind with the unmanifest as its object. It is accomplished with difficulty by embodied beings, who have misconceived the body as the self. For, embodied beings mistake the body for the self.

The superiority of those who adore the Supreme Being is now stated clearly:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Ye tu etc. upto avapyate.  On the other hand, those, who contemplate on the Self as the motionless Brahman - by them also all the attributes of Absolute  Lord are superimposed on the Self - the attributes that are indicated by the adjectives  'omni-present'  etc.  Therefore even the contemplators  of the  [attributeless]  Brahman  reach nothing but Me, of course.  However, the trouble they undergo, is much more.  For, they [first]  superimposed  on  the Self the actonary of attributes like absence-of-sin etc., and then comtemplate on It.  Thus, while without any effort  [on the part of the contemplator]  the Lord is readily available with the greatness due to the  host of self-accomplished attributes, these persons undergo two-fold trouble.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tesam, for them; avyakta-asakta-cetasam, who have their minds attached to the Unmanifest; klesah,the struggle; is adhika-tarah, greater. Although the trouble is certainly great for those who are engaged in works etc. for Me, still owing to the need of giving up self-identification with the body, it is greater in the case of those who accept the Immutable as the Self and who kept in view the supreme Reality. Hi, for; avyakta gatih, the Goal which is the Unmanifest-(the goal) which stands in the form of the Immutable; that is avapyate, attained; duhkham, with difficulty; dehavadbhih, by the embodied ones, by those who identify themselves with the body. Hence the struggle is greater.
We shall speak later of the conduct of those who meditate on the Unmanifest.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
'Then what is the fruit for the others?' To this question, the answer was given in 'they attain Me alone' (12.4). Then what is resolved by this next verse? To this, he says: 'How...' In the previous statement, only the acceptance of the position was made, not the removal of the defect intended there. Thus, when the objector raises his intention, the solution is stated, which is the meaning. Then, if the fruit is same for both, although this doubt was resolved in the previous sentence by the use of words like 'pari' etc., and He will also declare it so, still, because the object to be achieved was not explicitly stated, one who thinks that this is only a description of nature might have the doubt again. In the second half of the verse, since the words are distant, the connection is explained: 'avyakta...' By this, it is stated that 'duhkham' is an adverb of the action. Since the word 'gati' is used in the sense of instrument and state, he states the intended meaning: 'gati...' By deriving it as 'that by which one goes', 'gati' means the means. Now, how is the path said to be unmanifest, and why is the meaning of goal for the word 'gati' abandoned? To this, he says: 'avyakta...' The worship of the Unmanifest is the door, the means of which is so stated. The worship of the Lord which occurs after the worship of the Unmanifest is spoken of in this way. By this, the word 'avyakta' implies its worship. By that, the state of being the door is implied. If the meaning of goal were taken for the word 'gati', then the goal named Unmanifest would be spoken of. But that is not proper, because it was already stated 'they indeed attain Me alone'. In the first half, having promised the greater trouble of this path, how is it so? To this, it is answered in the second half that it is well-known. He explains that well-known fact: 'atishaya...' By 'sarva-sama-buddhih' etc. spoken of in the sixth, what then? To this, he says: 'without that, indeed...' This is stated as the exclusion of non-connection, not that it is accomplished by that alone: 'even when it is present...' When the direct realization of the Unmanifest is present, the grace of Vishnu occurs. From that, what then? 'And not without...' Without that grace of Vishnu. Let this be the manner of the path of attaining the Lord through the door of the worship of the Unmanifest. Even so, how is the trouble greater here? To this, he says: 'without...' The path of worship of the Unmanifest is this one. Then why is it undertaken by anyone, which was doubted by Arjuna? To this, he says: 'nevertheless...' If so, the two paths are indeed equal, since the trouble is resolved by this purpose. To this, he says: 'even there...' In the path through the door of the Unmanifest worship, the second path (devotion) has pain only optionally, as it is said 'or with less'. Further, in the path of the Unmanifest worship, the trouble is greater than the worship of the Lord: 'indriya...' If there is deficiency in sense restraint etc., even for an intense worshipper, the Goddess does not show great grace. But the Lord Himself gives those means with effort to the devotee, so there is ease for the devotees in the worship of the Lord. In the other path, the trouble is greater. All this is understood by the words 'paryupasate', 'sanniyamya', 'adhikatarah', and 'tarap' suffix. This is also established in other scriptures. He shows the Lord's intention from the Samaveda: 'samavede...' The genitive case in 'tesham' etc. is in the sense of the instrumental. 'Viditva' means having realized; from Him, from the pleased Vasudeva. 'Yavata' means with whatever effort the grace of the Unmanifest is obtained. The second word 'tu' in 'sarvasya api' is in the sense of 'api' (also). The word 'adhikya' (excess) also implies deficiency, as both excess and deficiency are causes of sin elsewhere. In the reading 'navyaktadeh', the word 'madhye' (in the midst) is to be supplied. 'Desiring my state of selfhood, they strive for the Supreme Self' - how is this sentence relevant to the context? To this, he says: 'the speech of Sri...' 'Always established in righteousness... I reside' is also the speech of Sri. That which is higher than the Mahat is indeed Brahman. Thus it is stated with reason by the Lord: 'If it be said that it refers to the Unmanifest, we say no, because of the reference to the three, etc.' From the masculine gender of the word 'tam', this is established. Being higher than the Mahat indeed belongs to that which is beyond the Unmanifest. Thus in the Agniveshya branch: 'without beginning and end, higher than the Mahat, eternal.' 'The Supreme Lord is invoked as greater than the Mahat.' The form of the Unmanifest is not denied by the Lord, as it is established in the Mahabharata etc. In the Brahma Sutras like 'Sarirarupakavinyastagrihiter...', the Samkhya-celebrated Pradhana is denied, and only the Vedic Unmanifest is affirmed. Thus in the Saukarayana Sruti: 'The Unmanifest is the bodily form of the bodiless Vishnu, from whom the dear birth of the universe takes place.' One purpose was mentioned before as 'nevertheless for those who have realized the Unmanifest'. Another purpose with proof is stated: 'suvratanam...' The Goddess quickly gives great wealth to those of good vows, not the Lord. In the Rigveda Khila: 'Knowing the Goddess who is golden-coloured, lotus-handed, ruler of all, and who pervades the inert creation, She indeed gives great glory to those of good vows within a few months, not the Lord.' This is not indicated in the Gita, so it is not spoken of there.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
For them, attaining My nature in that unmanifest way is indeed the case, but there is no happiness preceding that attainment; to say this, He says - 'klesho'dhikatarah...' (here the trouble is greater) and 'duhkhamavyakta...' (the unmanifest path is painful). Even there, only those who are devoted to the welfare of all beings attain Me in that way. By this, in the eleventh canto of the Bhagavata, in defining the nature of the devotee, it is said that one who is devoted to the welfare of all beings attains the Self of the Lord, not others; the same is stated here. Therefore, just as the body is to the embodied, for those whose minds are attached to My unmanifest body (nature), the attainment of Me, who am the Self residing within, is not directly in the form of blissful nectar (rasa-ananda), but rather it is the painful unmanifest path itself - which is the merging into unity with loss of individual identity, like salt in water. Moreover, even at the time of worship, the trouble of practice is greater, because contemplating non-difference in that attributeless (nirvishesha) state is bound to be painful. That is why it is said: 'Those who, abandoning devotion which is the path of welfare, undergo trouble, O Lord, merely for the sake of obtaining bare knowledge' (Srimad Bhagavatam 10.14.4). They, abandoning devotion to the Supreme Purusha, undergo trouble to gain knowledge of the bare, imperishable self; hence, the trouble is greater, and the suffix 'tarap' (greater) is used in the sense of 'mere labor'. In the path of My worship, there is supreme bliss from the very beginning; whereas in the path of knowledge of the Imperishable, it is only at the end. This is the difference.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Now, showing the superiority of the former over these, He says - 'klesho'dhikatarah...' For the former also, withdrawing the mind from objects, absorbing it in the Saguna Brahman, being constantly devoted to His work, and possessing supreme faith, there is indeed great trouble; but for those whose minds are attached to the Unmanifest, who are intent on contemplating the Nirguna Brahman, and who possess the previously mentioned means, the trouble or effort is much greater, i.e., excessively high. The Lord Himself states the reason for this: 'avyakta...' The unmanifest goal (gati), i.e., the destination which is the Brahman as the fruit, is attained with difficulty, with pain, by the embodied, i.e., by those who identify themselves with the body. For them, having renounced all actions, approaching a Guru, and inquiring into the Vedantic statements to remove various errors, there is a great effort which is directly experienced; hence it is said that the trouble is greater for them. Even though the fruit is the same, those who attain it through an easy means are superior compared to those who attain it through a difficult means. This is the import.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
'But since they also indeed attain You alone, why then are the others considered superior?' In anticipation of this, He states the difference based on trouble and absence of trouble in three verses - 'klesha...' For those whose minds are attached to the Unmanifest, the attribute-less Imperishable, the trouble is greater. Because (hi) the unmanifest goal or commitment (nistha) is attained with difficulty, with pain, by the embodied (those with body-consciousness). The idea is that it is extremely difficult for those with body-consciousness to be constantly oriented inward (pratyak-pravana).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
'If it is so, then why do You not declare their superiority, and why have You declared the Saguna worshippers as superior?' Anticipating this, with the intention that the superiority or otherwise of those who are established in their own self-nature must be stated, and because there is an absence of greater trouble in Saguna worship, He says - 'klesha...' Although for the Saguna worshippers also, there is indeed great trouble in being devoted to My work etc., still, for the worshippers of the Imperishable, the trouble due to the renunciation of body-consciousness is much greater. For those whose minds are attached to the Unmanifest, which is beyond the reach of the senses, for the sake of attaining It, because (hi) the unmanifest, imperishable goal is attained with difficulty, with pain, i.e., with extreme hardship, by the embodied, i.e., by those who identify with the body; therefore, it is said that the trouble is greater.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
He states the inferiority of the one devoted to the Imperishable in three verses starting with 'ye tu aksharam'. Since denying all kinds of definition would contradict one's own words, he states the specific definition intended to be denied, along with the reason: 'as distinct from the body'. Although in the case of the self which is distinct from the body, words like gods etc. are applied through the body, still, in the case of the liberated self-nature which is to be specifically defined and is devoid of connection with Prakriti, even such usage is not possible; this is the meaning. For that very reason, it is 'only as distinct from the body'. If absolute unmanifestness were intended, it would contradict one's own statement 'they worship'; with this in mind, he says: 'imperceptible to the eyes and other senses'. To avoid contradiction with the Sruti concerning atomic nature in the word 'sarvatragam' (omnipresent), he says 'in the bodies of gods and others'. Or, in order to show the context of the thinkability of what is to be denied, it is said 'omnipresent', meaning 'although existing in the bodies of gods and others'. For, a denial of mere contemplation is not possible due to contradiction with the injunction of self-contemplation; this is the meaning. For that very reason, it is 'kutastham' (unchanging), meaning 'distinct from all those'. The ancient self is common to many individuals who are spread out; here, only commonality is implied: 'common to all'. By this, those who interpret 'kutastha' as the ruler of Maya or as standing like a heap are refuted by abandoning the well-known meaning. Therefore, the interpretation 'firm like a mountain peak, without growth and decay' is also weak. If it is objected that commonality at one time is unproven, and although taking various species of bodies in different times, there is no taking of all individuals, then how is it common to all? To this, he says: 'gods etc.'. For, the special features of being gods etc. are not directly connected to the self. Since movement is inappropriate for the individual self which has departure etc., he states the meaning intended by 'achala' (immobile): 'by being unmodifiable'. For, impermanence is pervaded by modification. Thus, because of the absence of the pervader, the absence of the pervading is intended, so there is no tautology; he says: 'therefore, dhruvam' (eternal). Since the restraint of the mind is established by 'they worship' itself, he explains the restraint of the external sense-activities useful for that: 'well-subduing'. Intending 'non-injury, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, non-possession' etc., he says: 'everywhere'. Intending 'the wise look with equal eye on a dog and an outcast' etc., he says: 'having equal mind because of the single form of knowledge in all selves'. For that very reason, i.e., because of equal mind. 'Those who worship the Imperishable in this way' - having determined the individual self, denoted by the word 'Akshara', as the goal, they worship the Supreme Self as the means to it. 'They also' - meaning 'even those who have a determination of another goal distinct from Me'. 'Attain Me indeed' - in the manner of 'the Vishnu-power is said to be supreme', they attain My equal form, which is the liberated self-nature existing as a non-separate attribute, this is the meaning. If it is asked: 'The body of proof is fine, if we can find authority', anticipating this, he quotes the supporting Sruti: 'attains supreme equality'. Now, in passages like 'by which that Akshara is realized', 'the Akshara from which the sky is supported' etc., the word 'Akshara' is used for the Supreme Brahman; how then is it said to denote the individual self? To this, he says: 'from the word Akshara denoting...' because it is so said in 'Hara is the immortal and imperishable', 'the unchanging is called the imperishable' etc. 'The Unmanifest is the twenty-fifth, the Supreme Purusha is the twenty-sixth; knowing this, the self-controlled ascetics are liberated' - in accordance with this, for those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest individual self, the trouble is indeed greater, because of the absence of a mind absorbed in Me. The unmanifest-goal is a mental state with the unmanifest as its object, which is of the nature of cessation of all senses. If it is objected that possessing a body is possible for Sanaka and others too, to clear this, he says: 'by those who identify the body with the self'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover, even if they obtain the state desired by Me through tradition, they experience trouble. For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest form, due to the impairment of all senses manifested for the sake of service, the trouble is greater. Since their minds are attached, they have a desire for vision (darshana), and due to its absence, the trouble increases even in the stage of practice; hence, it is called greater (adhikatarah). The fruit also is attained with difficulty; so He says: 'avyakta...' By the embodied, i.e., those who serve the body as the self, the unmanifest goal, i.e., the state of commitment to the unmanifest, is attained with pain, with difficulty. The word 'hi' is used to show consistency. Because of the useless passage of the body which is only fit for the service of the Lord, that goal is indeed attained with pain. Even after attainment, due to the absence of a divine body etc., upon entering the unmanifest state, that portion which is of its nature experiences pain due to the memory of the previously experienced flavor of worldly senses, just like drinking water when submerged in water. This is the idea.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He states the difficulty of attaining this goal: 'klesha...' Although for the knowers of Saguna also there is indeed great trouble, still, they meditate with support and enter the supreme state by step-by-step ascent. But for those whose meditation is without support (niralambana), like fighting in the sky, there is greater trouble in stabilizing the mind in the objectless state. There, the method of gradual meditation is: in the pure Consciousness, the universal form (vishvarupa) is superimposed by Maya. And on that, the entire inert physical world is superimposed through the subtle body (ativahika). As stated by Vasistha: 'This body of yours is indeed subtle, whose self is the mind; by long contemplation, it is grasped as physical by physical intellect.' 'Ativahika' means that which crosses over stones etc. and carries the identifying self to the desired place; it is the subtle elements whose movement is unimpeded everywhere. Made of that, this entire universe is subtle; and because the mind itself is its body, it is dream-like, yet due to long contemplation it attains hardness like a diamond cage and is grasped by the physical intellect produced from gross elements - this is the meaning of the half-verse. Thus, just as a rope-snake observed with intense concentration disappears by itself, and the rope which is its substratum manifests, similarly, although inertness is superimposed on the deities of Madhava etc. which are in reality Consciousness, when one looks at that form with concentration for a long time even with physical eyes, the inertness of that form disappears and Consciousness manifests. That is why legends everywhere state that Bana and others behaved with their worshipped deities in the relation of master and servant. Even for an inert image, the reality is indeed the universal form; looking at the image with great respect, one understands its reality to be the universal form, just as Arjuna saw in the body of Vasudeva. This indeed is the direct perception born of deliberation, spoken of by the author of the Yoga Bhashya, Vyasa, as: 'That is the supreme direct perception, which is the seed of scripture and inference.' Samadhi with a gross object is deliberation (vitarka). Since the universal form is also superimposed on mere I-ness (asmita), upon seeing it, only I-ness remains. Since I-ness is also superimposed on pure Consciousness, when the mind is absorbed in it, I-ness disappears along with the mind, and only pure Consciousness remains. Thus, those attached to the manifest attain the supreme state through step-by-step ascent. But those who are attached to the unmanifest, wishing to ascend suddenly to the higher state like a bird, are greatly troubled by absorption (laya) and distraction (vikshepa). Sometimes they mistake absorption itself for samadhi, so there is even a possibility of their fall; hence it is said that the trouble is greater for those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest. Because (hi) the unmanifest, supportless goal or attainment of state is attained by the embodied, i.e., those with body-consciousness, with pain, with difficulty; the meaning is that it is not easily attained.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To make progress in that discipline is always difficult for those who are embodied.

 The group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the inconceivable, unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord are called jñāna-yogīs, and persons who are in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, engaged in devotional service to the Lord, are called bhakti-yogīs. Now, here the difference between jñāna-yoga and bhakti-yoga is definitely expressed. The process of jñāna-yoga, although ultimately bringing one to the same goal, is very troublesome, whereas the path of bhakti-yoga, the process of being in direct service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is easier and is natural for the embodied soul. The individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is very difficult for him to simply theoretically understand that he is not the body. Therefore, the bhakti-yogī accepts the Deity of Kṛṣṇa as worshipable because there is some bodily conception fixed in the mind, which can thus be applied. Of course, worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form within the temple is not idol worship. There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may be saguṇa or nirguṇa – of the Supreme possessing or not possessing attributes. Worship of the Deity in the temple is saguṇa worship, for the Lord is represented by material qualities. But the form of the Lord, though represented by material qualities such as stone, wood or oil paint, is not actually material. That is the absolute nature of the Supreme Lord. A crude example may be given here. We may find some mailboxes on the street, and if we post our letters in those boxes, they will naturally go to their destination without difficulty. But any old box, or an imitation which we may find somewhere but which is not authorized by the post office, will not do the work. Similarly, God has an authorized representation in the Deity form, which is called arcā-vigraha. This arcā-vigraha is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord. God will accept service through that form. The Lord is omnipotent, all-powerful; therefore, by His incarnation as arcā-vigraha He can accept the services of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the man in conditioned life. So for a devotee there is no difficulty in approaching the Supreme immediately and directly, but for those who are following the impersonal way to spiritual realization the path is difficult. They have to understand the unmanifested representation of the Supreme through such Vedic literatures as the Upaniṣads, and they have to learn the language, understand the nonperceptual feelings, and realize all these processes. This is not very easy for a common man. A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, engaged in devotional service, simply by the guidance of the bona fide spiritual master, simply by offering regulative obeisances unto the Deity, simply by hearing the glories of the Lord, and simply by eating the remnants of foodstuffs offered to the Lord, realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead very easily. There is no doubt that the impersonalists are unnecessarily taking a troublesome path with the risk of not realizing the Absolute Truth at the ultimate end. But the personalist, without any risk, trouble or difficulty, approaches the Supreme Personality directly. A similar passage appears in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam . It is stated there that if one ultimately has to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead (this surrendering process is called bhakti ), but instead takes the trouble to understand what is Brahman and what is not Brahman and spends his whole life in that way, the result is simply troublesome. Therefore it is advised here that one should not take up this troublesome path of self-realization, because there is uncertainty in the ultimate result. A living entity is eternally an individual soul, and if he wants to merge into the spiritual whole, he may accomplish the realization of the eternal and knowledgeable aspects of his original nature, but the blissful portion is not realized. By the grace of some devotee, such a transcendentalist, highly learned in the process of jñāna-yoga, may come to the point of bhakti-yoga, or devotional service. At that time, long practice in impersonalism also becomes a source of trouble, because he cannot give up the idea. Therefore an embodied soul is always in difficulty with the unmanifest, both at the time of practice and at the time of realization. Every living soul is partially independent, and one should know for certain that this unmanifested realization is against the nature of his spiritual, blissful self. One should not take up this process. For every individual living entity the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which entails full engagement in devotional service, is the best way. If one wants to ignore this devotional service, there is the danger of turning to atheism. Thus the process of centering attention on the unmanifested, the inconceivable, which is beyond the approach of the senses, as already expressed in this verse, should never be encouraged at any time, especially in this age. It is not advised by Lord Kṛṣṇa.