Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
idaṃ jñānamupāśritya mama sādharmyamāgatāḥ .
sarge.api nopajāyante pralaye na vyathanti ca

Word Meanings:
इदम् - this
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
उपाश्रित्य - having taken refuge in
मम - My
साधर्म्यम् - unity
आगताः - have attained to
सर्गे - at the time of creation
अपि - also
न - not
उपजायन्ते - are born
प्रलये - at the time of cosmic dissolution
न - not
व्यथन्ति - are disturbed
च - and.

Life Application:
Take refuge in this wisdom to attain divine nature, neither born at creation nor disturbed at dissolution.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Having taken refuge in this knowledge, those who have attained My own nature (sadharmya) are not born at the beginning of creation, nor are they disturbed at the time of dissolution.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
They who, having taken refuge in this knowledge, have attained to unity with Me, are neither born at the time of creation nor are they disturbed at the time of dissolution.

इदम् this? ज्ञानम् knowledge? उपाश्रित्य having taken refuge in? मम My? साधर्म्यम् unity? आगताः have attained to? सर्गे at the time of creation? अपि also? न not? उपजायन्ते are born? प्रलये at the time of dissolution? न not? व्यथन्ति are (they) disturbed? च and.Commentary Having resorted to this knowledge they (the sages) are assimilated into My own nature. They have attained to My Being. They have become identical with Me. They live in Me with no thought of thou or I. They go beyond birth and death. There is no birth for them when creation begins and there is no death for them at the time of dissolution. Having reached Me they attain eternity? immortality and perfection. Having become identical with Me through the attainment of the knowledge of the Self by practising the necessary means? they are neither born at the time of creation nor are they disited at the time of dissolution. Knowledge of the Self is eulogised by the Lord in this verse.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Dwelling in Wisdom and realising My Divinity, they are not born again when the universe is re-created at the beginning of every cycle, nor are they affected when it is dissolved.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The importance of the knowledge declared in this chapter is not so much from a theoretical standpoint as from the benefit derived from it in spiritual practice (sadhana). A seeker who properly understands the deep implications of this chapter attains the state of perfection. The Lord says, 'They attain My own nature.' In the Gita, Lord Krishna uses the word 'I' only from the standpoint of spiritual perfection. The subject matter of this chapter is to study the play of the Gunas (attributes) that bind us with limiting adjuncts (upadhis) and egoism (aham-bhava). If we once free ourselves from them and eliminate their influence on our mind, we can immediately experience our supreme nature, becoming free from the notion of being an individual soul (jiva-bhava). The sorrows that seem real to a dreamer in the dream state become unreal in the waking state. The rule is that the experiences of pleasure, pain, etc., of one state do not affect another state. Therefore, the identification with limiting adjuncts in the state of self-ignorance and the consequent bondage of the world appear real only to the individual soul (jiva), not to the self-realized person (atman-jnani). The wise man recognizes that all-pervading true self of his, which has neither birth nor dissolution. This is indicated here by a sentence, 'They are not born at the beginning of creation.' Creation is a play of the mind. When we do not identify with the mind, we will not be associated with it, and thus we will have no experience of creation. For example, when a person gets angry, he behaves as an angry person, but once he is freed from anger and the mind becomes calm, he cannot behave in that way. The mind's trick is that it imagines a creation through thoughts, and then, identifying with it, experiences itself in such bondage as if liberation from it is never possible. As long as we remain immersed in the mind, we will continue to be agitated by its disturbances. When we transcend the mind, i.e., become liberated, there is no creation in the pure Self; how then can we experience birth, and in that state, what fear can there be of dissolution? That is the state of complete liberation. But to conquer his mind, the seeker must have complete knowledge of those tricks (schemes) of the mind by which it often deludes him. Before attacking an enemy, it is indispensable to gain knowledge of his strategy. From this perspective, the Lord's statement is also appropriate that the complete knowledge of these three Gunas will help the seeker in conquering his mind and thus he will be able to attain liberation from all kinds of imperfections. Now, the Lord explains how this sorrowful world arises from the relationship between matter and spirit (jada and chetana).

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Holding on to this knowledge, they have attained the state of having attributes common with Me; [and] they are neither born even at the time of creation [of the world], nor do they come to grief at the time of dissolution [of it].

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Resorting to this knowledge, partaking of My Nature, they are not born at the time of creation, nor do they suffer at the time of dissolution.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Those who attain identity with Me by resorting of this Knowledge are not born even during creation, nor do they suffer pain during dissolution.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He describes the distinction between the fruit of knowledge and the fruit of action in the phrase 'asyas ca'. How is this knowledge resorted to? Through the acquisition of means such as hearing (shravana), reflection, etc., which are its causes; thus it is said 'jnana'. An objection may be raised: if 'sadharmya' (sharing My nature) is meant, then just like between a cow and a wild ox (gavaya), there would remain a distinction between the wise person and the Lord. To clear this doubt, it is said 'matsvarupatam' (My own nature/identity). If 'sadharmya' were taken in its literal/primary sense, difference would be certain, which would contradict the teachings of the Gita. Thus it is said 'na tu'. Since the fruit of knowledge is intended here for the sake of praising that knowledge, similarity of form (sarupya) is not desired here. Thus it is said 'phala'. In the case of sarupya, the fruit of knowledge would be abandoned, and the irrelevant fruit of meditation (dhyana) would result. Even though there is no birth etc. for those who have attained identity with the Lord during intermediate creations, could it happen during the main creation? To address this doubt, it is said 'sarge 'pi' (even during creation).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Those who, having taken refuge in this knowledge, have attained My nature (likeness), are not born even in the great creation (beginning of the cosmic cycle) nor are they disturbed in the great dissolution.

Explanation — 'idam jñānamupāśritya' — Taking refuge in that knowledge means experiencing that knowledge whose glory was described by the Lord in the previous verse with two adjectives: 'supreme' (uttama) and 'transcendental' (para). With the experience of that knowledge, all doubts of a person are destroyed, and he becomes the embodiment of knowledge. 'mama sādharmyamāgatāḥ' — By taking refuge in that knowledge, men attain My likeness, which means that just as I do not have authorship and enjoyership (kartrtva-bhoktrtva), similarly they also do not have authorship and enjoyership. Just as I always remain untainted and changeless (nirlipta-nirvikara), they also experience their own untaintedness and changelessness. The wise sages, though becoming untainted and changeless like God, cannot perform the acts of creation, sustenance, and destruction of the world like God. Yes, by the power of yogic practice, some power comes to a yogi, but that power is also not equal to the power of God. The reason is that he is a 'yunjan' yogi, meaning he has acquired some power through practice. But God is a 'yukta' yogi, meaning the power is eternally self-proven in Him. God is capable of doing everything — capable of doing, not doing, or doing otherwise. The power of a yogi is limited, but the power of God is limitless. 'sarge'pi nopajayante' — Here, the word 'api' implies that those wise sages are not born even at the beginning of the great creation. At the beginning of the great creation, the fourteen worlds and the authorities of those worlds are created, but those sages are not born, meaning they do not have to assume a body under the control of karma. 'pralaye na vyathanti ca' — In the great dissolution, all animate and inanimate beings are burnt by the Samvartaka fire. Due to the swelling of the ocean, the earth gets submerged. Agitation and chaos arise in the fourteen worlds. All beings suffer and perish. But in the great dissolution, those wise sages have no sorrow, there is no agitation or modification in them. The principle (Tattva) which those sages have attained is free from agitation and modification; then how can those sages be disturbed? They cannot be. The meaning of not being born even in the great creation and not being disturbed in the great dissolution is that the wise sage's relationship with nature (Prakriti) and the qualities born of nature is completely severed. Therefore, the birth-death, sorrow, and agitation that occur due to the relationship with nature do not occur in the sage who is free from the relationship with nature. Relationship — Those who attain My nature are not born even in the great creation, but what is the process of generation of those beings who are born in the great creation? This is described in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
They, 'resorting to this knowledge' which will be expounded later, come to partake of My nature, and they attain My status. 'They are not born at the time of creation,' they are not subjected to the process of creation, and they 'suffer not at the time of dissolution,' i.e. they are not subjected to the distress involved in dissolution of the universe.

In order to show how the Gunas of Prakrti constitute the cause of bondage, Sri Krsna now declares that, the aggregation of beings, born from the conjunction of Purusa and Prakrti as stated already in the passages, 'Whatever being is born' (13.26), is brought about by the Lord Himself:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Idam etc.  Vyathanti :  The suffix tip  (Personal  Termination, Third person, Singular)  is due to Vedism.  The same may be stated in other  [similar] instances of the suffixes of Case Terminations and Personal  Terminations.		
 Now to begin with,  [the Bhagavat] speaks of the seence in the cycle  of  birth and death.  For, if what is to be abandoned is understood along with its cause then it is easy to abandon that -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Agatah, those who attain; mama sadharmyam, identity with Me the supreme God, unity with My real nature-sadharmyam, however, does not mean similarity of attributes, for, in the scripture Gita, distinction between the Knower of the field and God is not admitted; and this statement of the result is by way of eulogy-; upasritya, by resorting to i.e. by following; idam, this; jnanam, Knowledge as described, i.e., by following the means to Knowledge; na, are not; upajayante, born, produced; api, even; sarge, during creation; nor do they vyathanti, suffer pain, i.e. they do not perish; pralaye, during dissolution, when even Brahma perishes.
The Lord says that association of this kind between the field and the Knower of the field is the origin of all beings:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Those who attain My sadharmya, which means similarity with Me by possessing the six divine attributes (shad-guna), are not born even during creation, nor do they suffer during dissolution; rather, they always dwell near Me. By this, the abundance of liberated souls in that state is indicated, as per scriptural statements like 'where the followers of Hari dwell' etc.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He shows the absolute nature of that perfection: having resorted to and practiced this aforesaid knowledge which is the means of knowledge, those who have attained My sadharmya, which means My own form in absolute non-difference, are not born even during creation, when Hiranyagarbha and others are produced. And during dissolution, at the time of Brahma's destruction, they do not suffer pain, meaning they do not perish or dissolve (into Prakriti).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover — 'idam'. Resorting to this knowledge to be described, i.e., performing the means of knowledge, those who have attained My sadharmya, which means identity with My own nature, are not born even during creation, when Brahma and others are produced. Similarly, even during dissolution, they do not suffer pain, i.e., they do not experience the sufferings of dissolution. The meaning is that they do not return to the cycle of birth and death.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
When there is a desire to know why the siddhi (perfection) called liberation is supreme compared to the fruit of action, and why its means, knowledge, is the best, he shows the absolute nature of that siddhi: 'idam'. Having resorted to this aforesaid and to-be-described knowledge, i.e., performing the means of knowledge such as shravana (hearing) etc., they have attained the sadharmya of My Supreme Self, which means My own form (identity). According to the Shruti statement 'He who knows Brahman becomes Brahman indeed', one should not mistake sadharmya to mean similarity of attributes. This is because in the teachings of the Gita, distinction between the knower of the field and the Lord is not accepted, and also because taking it to mean similarity of attributes would lead to accepting the irrelevant fruit of meditation while abandoning the relevant fruit of knowledge. They are not born even during creation, i.e., at the time of the birth of Brahma and others, nor during dissolution, i.e., at the time of Brahma's destruction, do they suffer pain, meaning they do not deviate. The word 'api' (even) implies: what to speak of not obtaining birth etc., during intermediate creations. He describes the nature of the supreme, most excellent Brahman. Among all types of knowledge such as amanitva (humility) etc., and rituals like yajnas, that which is the best knowledge is the internal means, since its fruit is liberation. In the cognition 'I know the pot', there is the knowledge of the ego-sense, of the mental modification in the form of the pot, and of the pot itself; thus there are three cognitions due to different objects. Among these, the first two are secondary. And that which is the ultimate, best knowledge in the form of the fruit that illuminates the pot is indeed the Supreme Brahman. As stated by the Vartikakara: 'That consciousness which is associated with external objects as the fruit of cognition, that alone is to be known here as the object (Brahman) by the authority of Vedantic declarations.' Others explain: 'having known this knowledge, i.e., having realized it through the mental mode produced by Vedantic statements, and having resorted to this knowledge which is free from the distinctions of subject and object...' In this explanation, the consistency of the genitive case in 'jnānānām' as specifying one out of many is to be considered. For, the statement of the excellence of the means compared to other means is what is appropriate. Moreover, he describes its nature. Knowledge is the internal means because its fruit is liberation. Statements like 'I know the pot' etc. are mutually incompatible; this is the direction (guidance).

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Showing that there is no repetitiveness, he introduces the next verse: 'Again that knowledge...'. The sense is that there is no repetitiveness, because the attainment of the desired was spoken of earlier, while the cessation of the undesired is spoken of here. If the word 'idam' (this) referred to what was already said, it would be contextually inappropriate; therefore, he explains it otherwise as 'what is to be described'. Since 'āgatāḥ' (having come) as indicating the agent of coming would not fit the context, he explains it in the sense of attainment: 'prāptāḥ' (having attained). Although 'vyathanti' means suffering pain, since it is associated here with birth, it is appropriate to take it as implying destruction (dissolution). With this intention, he says: 'and they do not undergo the process of dissolution (destruction)'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Explaining how perfection is attained through knowledge, he says: 'idam'. Resorting to this knowledge to be described, i.e., performing the spiritual practices, those who have attained My sadharmya, which means similarity of nature or fitness for My divine play (leela-yogyatva), are not born even during creation, i.e., during the primal creation of Brahma and others. And further, during dissolution, i.e., the destruction of creation, they do not suffer pain, meaning they do not return to the cycle of birth and death.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Having resorted to this knowledge which is free from the distinctions of subject and object, they have attained My, the Lord's, sadharmya, which means similarity of attributes such as being the self of all (sarvatmatva), the ruler of all (sarva-niyantrtva), and the substratum of all existence (sarva-bhavadhisthatrtva). And thus the Shrutis declare that the fruit of knowledge is the attainment of the likeness of the Lord: 'He who knows "I am Brahman" becomes all this', and 'He is the controller of all, the lord of all, the ruler of all; He does not become greater by good action nor smaller by evil action'. Moreover, sages like Bhushundi and others, by the power of knowledge alone, are not born even during creation, and during dissolution, though entering into their respective elemental states, they do not suffer from the fire of dissolution etc. These two verses have been explained in the commentary as being solely for the purpose of praising the knowledge to be described. The meaning of 'resorting to that knowledge' is 'having performed the means of knowledge'. The rest is clear.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
By becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the transcendental nature like My own. Thus established, one is not born at the time of creation or disturbed at the time of dissolution.

 After acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires qualitative equality with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becoming free from the repetition of birth and death. One does not, however, lose his identity as an individual soul. It is understood from Vedic literature that the liberated souls who have reached the transcendental planets of the spiritual sky always look to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, being engaged in His transcendental loving service. So, even after liberation, the devotees do not lose their individual identities. Generally, in the material world, whatever knowledge we get is contaminated by the three modes of material nature. Knowledge which is not contaminated by the three modes of nature is called transcendental knowledge. As soon as one is situated in that transcendental knowledge, he is on the same platform as the Supreme Person. Those who have no knowledge of the spiritual sky hold that after being freed from the material activities of the material form, this spiritual identity becomes formless, without any variegatedness. However, just as there is material variegatedness in this world, in the spiritual world there is also variegatedness. Those in ignorance of this think that spiritual existence is opposed to material variety. But actually, in the spiritual sky, one attains a spiritual form. There are spiritual activities, and the spiritual situation is called devotional life. That atmosphere is said to be uncontaminated, and there one is equal in quality with the Supreme Lord. To obtain such knowledge, one must develop all the spiritual qualities. One who thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either by the creation or by the destruction of the material world.