Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
pravṛttiṃ ca nivṛttiṃ ca janā na vidurāsurāḥ .
na śaucaṃ nāpi cācāro na satyaṃ teṣu vidyate

Word Meanings:
प्रवृत्तिम् - action
च - and
निवृत्तिम् - inaction
च - and
जनाः - men
न - not
विदुः - know
आसुराः - the demoniac
न - not
शौचम् - purity
न - not
अपि - also
च - and
आचारः - conduct
न - not
सत्यम् - truth
तेषु - in them
विद्यते - is.

Life Application:
Demonic people know not what to do or avoid; neither purity, nor good conduct, nor truth is found in them.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The demoniacal know not what to do and what to refrain from; neither purity, nor right conduct, nor truth is found in them.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The demoniacal know not what to do and what to refrain from; neither purity, nor right conduct nor truth is found in them.

प्रवृत्तिम् action? च and? निवृत्तिम् inaction? च and? जनाः men? न not? विदुः know? आसुराः the demoniac? न not? शौचम् purity? न not? अपि also? च and? आचारः (right) conduct? न not? सत्यम् truth? तेषु in them? विद्यते is.Commentary The demoniacal do not understand the nature of action and inaction (right abstinence). The idea of a Self apart from the body? doing nothing (actionless) but imply watching the play of the Gunas is something incomprehensible to them. They have no consideration for the interest of others. They work for the sake of their bodies or sensual enjoyment. They are greedy? selfish and cruel. Therefore? they have neither good conduct nor good behaviour. They are untruthful? unjust and impure. They do not know what actions they should do in order to attain the goal of life or end of human existence? nor from what actions they should refrain to ward off,evil.Those who are endowed with demoniacal alities are sunk in the mire of ignorance. They are totally ignorant of what is prescribed or what is prohibited action. They have not the least idea of what purity or cleanliness is. Their actions are crooked. They know neither right Pravritti nor right Nivritti. They have no idea of virtue or vice or of scriptural injunctions or prohibitions. They will never speak loving words. They are hypocrites and liars.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The godless do not know how to act or how to renounce. They have neither purity nor truth. They do not understand the right principles of conduct.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The demoniacal know not what to do and what to refrain from; neither purity, nor right conduct nor truth is found in them.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that 'pravritti' and 'nivritti' refer to actions that should be performed (duties) and those that should be avoided (prohibited actions). The demoniacal person has no concept of this distinction. Their list of vices starts with ignorance (ajnanam), which makes them incapable of understanding the higher purpose of life. Purity (saucham) of environment and mind is absent in them, leading to undisciplined and rude conduct (achara). Lacking self-control and clarity, they cannot practice truthfulness (satyam). They are not deliberately evil, but are helplessly bound by their own lower nature.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The demoniac men do not know the origin and the withdrawal; neither purity, nor good conduct, nor truth does exist in them.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The demoniac men know neither action nor renunciation. Cleanliness is not in them, nor even right conduct, nor truth.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Neither do the demoniacal persons under-stand what is to be done and what is not to be done; nor does purity, or even good conduct or truthfulness exist in them.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that Asuri individuals do not know the path of virtuous action (pravritti) and the path of desisting from prohibited actions (nivritti). Cleanliness and truth are also absent because of their lack of right conduct.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Demoniac persons know not what to do and what to refrain from; neither purity, nor good conduct, nor truthfulness is found in them.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that due to modern undisciplined environments and bad habits, people lose the sense of duty and non-duty. They do not know what is right to accept (pravritti) and what is right to avoid (nivritti). Lacking this discrimination, they lose all sense of cleanliness (physical and mental), proper behavior towards elders, and truthfulness. Their lives are centered only around eating, sensory enjoyment, and accumulation of wealth, making them completely blind to higher virtues.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The demoniac men do not know the 'path of action and renunciation,' viz., the Vedic Dharma that leads to prosperity and final release. 'Cleanliness' is the competence for performing Vedic rites as established in the Sastras. That 'cleanliness,' be it external or internal, is alien to the demoniac. Nor 'right conduct,' viz., that right conduct such as twilight prayers (Sandhya-vandana) etc., by means of which this internal and external cleanliness arises - even that right conduct is alien to them. For it is declared in:  'He who does not perform twilight prayers, is always unholy and is unfit for any rites' (Daksha Sm., 2.23). Likewise, 'truth' is not found among them, viz., that truthful speech, which is conducive to the welfare of beings and which is in accordance with one's actual knowledge, does not characterise them.

Moreover:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Pravrttim etc.  Origin :  i.e. wherefrom this  [universe] is born.  Withdrawal : i.e. into what  this gets dissolved.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Na, niether; do the asurah, demoniacal; janah, persons; viduh, understand; pravritim, what is to be done with regard to that which is a means to the human ends; and nivirttim, what is not to be done, the opposite of that (former) and from which source of evil one should desist. Nor only do they not know what is to be done and what is not to be done, na, nor; does saucam, purity; na api, or even; acarah, good conduct; or satyam, truthfulness; vidyate, exist; tesu, in them. The demons are verily bereft of purity and good conduct; they are deceitful and given to speaking lies.
Further,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that the Asuri people do not know what constitutes right action (dharma) or wrong action (adharma), nor do they follow the rules of purity and truth laid down by sages like Manu.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the twelve verses starting from this one describe the Asuri nature in detail. Because they do not know right action and right desistance, virtues like purity and truth are absent in them.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that right knowledge is required to abandon Asuri qualities. Since these people lack discrimination, they are unclean, behave badly, and lie.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'pravritti' and 'nivritti' refer to the Vedic dharma that leads to worldly prosperity and liberation, respectively. Purity is the fitness for performing Vedic rites.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that Asuri souls do not know how to act in a way that is conducive to the service of the Lord. Body purity for His service is absent in them.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'pravritti' refers to the positive commandments of the scriptures and 'nivritti' refers to prohibitions. The Asuri people have no regard for either.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not to be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is found in them.

 In every civilized human society there is some set of scriptural rules and regulations which is followed from the beginning. Especially among the Āryans, those who adopt the Vedic civilization and who are known as the most advanced civilized peoples, those who do not follow the scriptural injunctions are supposed to be demons. Therefore it is stated here that the demons do not know the scriptural rules, nor do they have any inclination to follow them. Most of them do not know them, and even if some of them know, they have not the tendency to follow them. They have no faith, nor are they willing to act in terms of the Vedic injunctions. The demons are not clean, either externally or internally. One should always be careful to keep his body clean by bathing, brushing teeth, shaving, changing clothes, etc. As far as internal cleanliness is concerned, one should always remember the holy names of God and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. The demons neither like nor follow all these rules for external and internal cleanliness. As for behavior, there are many rules and regulations guiding human behavior, such as the Manu-saṁhitā, which is the law of the human race. Even up to today, those who are Hindu follow the Manu-saṁhitā. Laws of inheritance and other legalities are derived from this book. Now, in the Manu-saṁhitā it is clearly stated that a woman should not be given freedom. That does not mean that women are to be kept as slaves, but they are like children. Children are not given freedom, but that does not mean that they are kept as slaves. The demons have now neglected such injunctions, and they think that women should be given as much freedom as men. However, this has not improved the social condition of the world. Actually, a woman should be given protection at every stage of life. She should be given protection by the father in her younger days, by the husband in her youth, and by the grownup sons in her old age. This is proper social behavior according to the Manu-saṁhitā. But modern education has artificially devised a puffed-up concept of womanly life, and therefore marriage is practically now an imagination in human society. The social condition of women is thus not very good now, although those who are married are in a better condition than those who are proclaiming their so-called freedom. The demons, therefore, do not accept any instruction which is good for society, and because they do not follow the experience of great sages and the rules and regulations laid down by the sages, the social condition of the demoniac people is very miserable.