Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sadbhāve sādhubhāve ca sadityetatprayujyate .
praśaste karmaṇi tathā sacchabdaḥ pārtha yujyate

Word Meanings:
सद्भावे - in the sense of reality (existence)
साधुभावे - in the sense of goodness (virtue)
च - and
सत् - eternal reality
इति - thus
एतत् - this
प्रयुज्यते - is used
प्रशस्ते - auspicious
कर्मणि - an act
तथा - so also
सत् - eternal reality
शब्दः - word
पार्थ - O Partha
युज्यते - is used.

Life Application:
'Sat' is used in sense of reality and goodness; so also 'Sat' is applied to auspicious action.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The word 'SAT' is used in the sense of existence and of goodness; and so also, O Partha, the word 'SAT' is applied to an auspicious action.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The word ï1Satï1 is used in the sense of reality and of goodness; and so also, O Arjuna, the word ï1Satï1 is used in the sense of an auspicious act.

सद्भावे in the sense of reality? साधुभावे in the sense of goodness? च and? सत् Sat? इति thus? एतत् this? प्रयुज्यते is used? प्रशस्ते auspicious? कर्मणि (in the sense of) an act? तथा so also? सत् Sat? शब्दः word? पार्थ O Partha? युज्यते is used.Commentary Satbhava That which is unchanging amidst the changing? that which is permanent amidst the impermanent? that which exists in the past? present and future is Sat the reality behind the everchanging names and forms is Sat the substratum in which the everchanging forms inhere is Sat. Meritorious action is Sat.Sadhubhava An attribute of harmony with nature? so that the worlds cycle moves smoothly.The word Sat is powerful enough to make a defective action perfect and complete. When a good action is likely to be rendered Asat or bad owing to a single defect? the use of the word Sat makes it free from defects and brings it to a successful termination. The word Sat removes the evil ality of the action as it has the power of purifying and rendering the act perfect.Sat is Existence Absolute. Sat is Para Brahman. Sat is the inexpressible symbol of that mysterious indescribable? illimitable? indivisible? selfluminous? immortal Brahman.The word Sat is used when you wish to express the reality of an object which is unreal or which is relatively real? as for instance? the birth of a son who is unreal or relatively real in telling that a man is one of good conduct when his conduct is not good or is only relatively good? and in expressing that an act is auspicious? when it is not auspicious or only relatively auspicious.Brahman alone is real. It alone really exists. But we say when a son is born to Mr. Govindan that Mr. Govindans son has come into existence. From the viewpoint of Brahman or Existence Absolute? Mr. Govindans son never exists.The word Sat which is only applied to Brahman is used also for Mr. Govindans son who is unreal or relatively real. Brahman alone is absolutely good and absolutely auspicious. But the,word Sat that can properly be applied to Brahman alone is applied to an act which is not auspicious or which is only relatively auspicious. The use of Sat renders the imperfectly performed actions perfect.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Sat' means Reality or the highest Good, and also, O Arjuna, it is used to mean an action of exceptional merit.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The word 'SAT' is used to denote reality (existence) and goodness. In this relative world, we often mistake the experiences of body, mind, and intellect as absolute reality. Chanting 'SAT' reminds us that the ultimate Reality (Paramarthika Satya) is the substratum of this relative world.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
In the sense of  'right one'  (or 'manifesting as being')  and in the sense of  'proper one'  (or 'manifesting perfectly'), this word  SAT is employed.  Likewise the word SAT is used with regard to the praiseworthy act; O son of Prtha !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
This term Sat is used in the sense of existence and goodness. And so also, O Arjuna, the word Sat is applied to an auspicious action.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
This word sat is used with regard to (something) coming into being and with regard to (someone) becoming good. So also, O son of Prtha, the word sat is used with regard to an auspicious rite.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that after describing the application of the words OM and TAT, the application of SAT is being stated. The word SAT is used to denote existence when there is doubt, goodness when there is doubt, and auspicious rites.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Partha, the word 'SAT' is used in the sense of existence and of goodness, and so also the word 'SAT' is applied to an auspicious action.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'Sadbhava' refers to the absolute, ever-present existence of the Supreme Reality in all forms, incarnations, and states. 'Sadhubhava' refers to all noble, righteous, and divine feelings in the heart (like truth and mercy) that lead to God-realization. Chanting 'SAT' aligns our existence and feelings with the Supreme. 'Prasaste karmani' refers to noble and scriptural actions (like sacraments, marriage, charity, or public service). Chanting 'SAT' sanctifies these actions, designating them as 'satsang', 'satkarma', or 'sadachara'.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The word Sat is applied in Vedic and common usage, in respect of all contexts to express existence (Sadbhava) and auspiciousness (Sadhubhava). Similarly, in relation to any praiseworthy worldly act, viz., auspicious undertaking by someone, the word Sat is applied to express, 'This is a good act.'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.23–17.27 jointly): Om etc. upto abhidhiyate.  An indication of the Brahman i.e., an act of facing (or aiming at)  the Brahman is made by these  three words viz.,  OM, TAT and SAT.  Of  them, Om indicates that 'This purport of the scriptures is [to be]  accepted as long as one has bodily connection'.

The pronoun TAT, which denotes generality and which is incapable of denoting exclusively a particular, mentions, as far as the Brahman is concerned, the absence of intention for fruit.  An intention is not possible without reference to something particular. No doubt  [TAT] may denote all particulars  [in general]. But it would lead to intending the fruits and the doer-ship with regard to all [in general].  Even then [the Brahman] cannot have connection with any particular fruit.

The Vedic word SAT denotes 'praise'.  The act, like this sacrifice etc., though performed, turns out to be an act of the Tamas (evil act) if it is performed with the idea, 'It is an evil act'.  Further, what is performed  with an intention for a particular fruit is not praiseworthy, and it causes nothing but bondage. Therefore, those, who bear in mind, 'This is a thing to be performed' - they are not fettered, even though they perform acts like sacrifice etc.  With this idea only, it has been said in the Adiparvan as -

'The austerity is not dirt, nor the [Vedic] study, nor the natural ritual enjoined by the Vedas, and nor the act of earning wealth by all efforts.  But, if they are struck by mind, they themselves become dirt.' (MB, Adi. i, 210).

[Here in this passage]  dirt that which fetters.  Natural :  [That is, ordained ], such as - 'Without expecting anything, a Brahman should learn the Vedas etc., together with their six subsidiaries' etc.

By all effort :  by the act that is suitable and is well known in the scriptures and in the worldly practice.  By mind :  by the mind that is yoked to the triad of the Strands, Sattva etc.  [Those actions that]  have been simply ruined  [by that mind], are binding and not otherwise.  This is the idea here.

Therefore, the acts like sacrifice etc., and the acts, like acquiring  [Wealth] etc., for that purpose, have to be performed as being inevitable as long as the body exists.

Or, perhaps, the word  OM  conveys  [with regard to the Brahman]  the idea of That in Which the entire universe has been totally calmed down.  TAT conveys the idea of That of the nature of Sovereign  Independence of Will, which is nothing but comprehending the rising waves in the form of the universe.  And the word SAT denotes the act of manifestation by the Brahman - even though It is complete in Itself - as [the universe]  having  varied nature, a manifestation that  causes differences  (or duality) expanding under the weight of its Sovereign  Independence of Will.  Hence it has been said  'In the sense of manifesting as beings and in the sense of manifesting  perfectly  [SAT is employed].'  Thus, having in front  [as a cause]  that aspect  (the Soul) of  highly tranquil nature; and having in the  centre that aspect which is well connected with desire-waves viz., the desire to make gift, the desire to perform sacrifice and the desire to observe penance; this final body radiates  (or dances)  filled with a group of activities, such as  offering gift, performing sacrifice and observing austerity, and of what are conducive to them.  This triad is indeed simultaneously the inherent nature of the Unhindered One (the Soul).  So, what fruit could be there ?  And to whom ?  How ?  Whence ?  Where ?  And by what means ?

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Etat, this; sat iti, word sat, a name of Brahman; prayujyate, is used, is uttered; sad-bhave, with regard to (something) coming into being-with regard to coming into existence of something that was not there, as for instance the birth of a son who was not there before; so also sadhu-bhave, with regard to (someone) becoming good-sadhu-bhava means coming to possess good conduct by an evil person who had bad behaviour; with regard to that. Tatha, so also, O Son of Prtha; the sat-sabdah, word sat; yujyate (-which is the same as prayujyate-), is used; prasaste karmani, with regard to an auspicious rite, such as mirage etc.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that the word 'SAT' is used to denote existence (that which is real) and goodness. Since the all-pervading Brahman is real, the word 'SAT' is applied to all things and auspicious acts to invoke His presence.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that 'SAT' is the famous name of Brahman denoting absolute existence. It is used by the wise in the sense of existence when there is doubt, goodness when there is bad conduct, and in auspicious rites like marriage. Chanting 'SAT' ensures that the ritual yields auspicious results quickly, removing all obstructions.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the word 'SAT' is used in two senses: existence (such as saying a son exists) and goodness (such as saying a person is virtuous). It is also applied to auspicious rites like marriage to indicate their goodness.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that 'SAT' is used to denote the coming into existence of something previously absent (like birth of a son), or a change from bad to good conduct. It is also used in auspicious ceremonies like marriage.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the word 'SAT' is used to express existence and goodness in both Vedic and common speech. In relation to worldly auspicious acts like marriage, it means 'this is a good act.' This establishes the power of the word to purify actions.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that the name 'SAT' is used to denote the existence of faith (astikya-bhava) and goodness (uttamatva-bhava). It is also applied to scriptural activities performed for the sake of the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that after describing the application of OM and TAT, the application of SAT in two verses is stated. 'SAT' is used by believers in the sense of existence, goodness, and Veda-enjoined auspicious actions.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The austerity that is practiced with the highest faith by those who do not desire the fruits, who are self-controlled, and who have subdued their mind and senses, is declared to be in the mode of goodness.

 The words praśaste karmaṇi, or “prescribed duties,” indicate that there are many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are purificatory processes, beginning from the time of conception up to the end of one’s life. Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the living entity. In all such activities it is recommended that one vibrate oṁ tat sat. The words sad-bhāve and sādhu-bhāve indicate the transcendental situation. Acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious of the activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called a sādhu. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matter becomes clear in the association of the devotees. The words used are satāṁ prasaṅgāt. Without good association, one cannot achieve transcendental knowledge. When initiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates the words oṁ tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of performance of yajña the object is the Supreme, oṁ tat sat. The word tad-arthīyam further means offering service to anything which represents the Supreme, including such service as cooking and helping in the Lord’s temple, or any other kind of work for broadcasting the glories of the Lord. These supreme words oṁ tat sat are thus used in many ways to perfect all activities and make everything complete.