Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
prakṛtiṃ puruṣaṃ caiva viddhyanādi ubhāvapi .
vikārāṃśca guṇāṃścaiva viddhi prakṛtisambhavān

Word Meanings:
प्रकृतिम् - matter
पुरुषम् - spirit
च - and
एव - even
विद्धि - know
अनादी - beginningless
उभौ - both
अपि - also
विकारान् - modifications
च - and
गुणान् - the qualities
च - and
एव - even
विद्धि - know
प्रकृतिसंभवान् - born of Prakriti.

Life Application:
Know that material nature and individual spirit are both beginningless, and all modifications and qualities spring from nature.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Know that both Prakriti (Nature) and Purusha (the Soul) are beginningless. And know also that all modifications (vikaras) and qualities (gunas) are born of Prakriti.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Know thou that Nature (matter) and the Spirit are both beginningless; and know also that all modifications and alities are born of Nature.

प्रकृतिम् matter? पुरुषम् spirit? च and? एव even? विद्धि know? अनादी beginningless? उभौ both? अपि also? विकारान् modifications? च and? गुणान् alities? च and? एव even? विद्धि know? प्रकृतिसंभवान् born of Prakriti.Commentary Steps are necessary to reach the top floor of a building. Even so? steps are necessary to reach the summit of the knowledge of the Self. That is the reason why Lord Krishna took Arjuna to the summit of knowledge step by step. He first taught Arjuna the nature of the field? then knowledge? ignorance or nonwisdom? and ultimately the knowable. When a child is to be fed,the intelligent mother divides the food into small portions and feeds the child little by little. Even so Lord Krishna fed His spiritual child Arjuna with the spiritual food little by little.Lord Krishna says O Arjuna I will give you the same teaching in another form by the description of the Spirit and Nature.Till now the Lord expounded the knowledge of the field and the Self in accordance with the philosophy of the Upanishads. Now He explains the same knowledge in accordance with the Sankhya philosophy? but without accepting its dual nature in the form of discrimination between the Spirit and Nature.Vikaras Modifications from the MahatTattva or intellect down to the physical body the twentyfour principles of the Sankhyas. The Self within is changeless. All changes take place in Nature. Mulaprakriti (the Primordial Nature? the Unmanifested) becomes modified into Mahat? egoism? mind? the great elements and other minor modifications.Just as coolness and ice? the day and the night? are inseparable? so also matter and Spirit are inseparable. The three alities Sattva? Rajas and Tamas are born of Nature (matter). All actions proceed from the mind? the lifeforce? the senses and the physical body.According to the Sankhya philosophy? Prakriti and Purusha are not only eternal and beginningless but also independent of each other and selfcreated. According to Vedanta philosophy? Prakriti or Maya originates from Brahman and is? therefore? neither selfcreated nor independent. Isvara has Maya under His perfect control. Maya is His causal body. Maya is His illusory power.Matter and Spirit are the Natures of Isvara. Know that these two are beginningless. That which has no beginning is Anadi. As Isvara is eternal? His two Natures also should be eternal. (This is according to the Sankhyas.)Isvara possesses these two Natures (superior and inferior) by which He causes the creation? preservation and destruction of the universe. Therefore He has the Lordship and rules over the universe. The two Natures have no beginning. Therefore they are the cause of Samsara.The inferior Nature (Apara Prakriti) which consists of the eightfold division of Nature referred to in chapter VII? verse 4? is the Prakriti of chapter XIII? verse 19. The superior Nature (Para Prakriti) referred to in chapter VII? verse 5? is the Purusha of chapter XIII? verse 19. Purusha here means Jiva (the individual soul).Even a child smiles and experiences exhilaration? grief? fear? anger? pleasure and pain. Who taught it The impressions of the virtuous and vicious actions of this birth cannot be the cause of these. The impressions of the previous birth alone are the cause of all these. They (the impressions) must have a support. From this we can clearly infer the existence of the individual soul in the previous birth and that the individual soul is beginningless. If you do not accept that the individual soul is beginningless? the two defects of Kritanasa (nonfruition of actions performed) and Akritabhyagama (causeless effect) will creep in. Pleasure and pain which are the fruits of virtuous and vicious actions done previously will pass away without being experienced. This is the defect of Kritanasa. So also? one will have to enjoy pleasure and pain? the fruits of good and bad actions which were not done by him previously. This is the defect of Akritabhyagama. In order to get rid of these two defects we will have to accept that the individual soul is beginningless. The scriptures,also emphatically declare that the soul is beginningless.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Know thou further that Nature and God have no beginning; and that differences of character and quality have their origin in Nature only.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Earlier in Chapter 7, Lord Krishna had described His two natures—Apara (lower) and Para (higher)—stating that these two natures are the womb or source of all creation. Here, these two are referred to as Kshetra (the Field) and Kshetrajna (the Knower of the Field). Expressing the same idea in different words, the Lord says that both Prakriti (Kshetra) and Purusha (Kshetrajna) are beginningless. Both of these are two manifestations of the Supreme Self. Since the Supreme Lord is eternal, it is only fitting that His two aspects are also beginningless. Prakriti and Purusha, through their mutual relationship, are the cause of the creation, sustenance, and dissolution of this world. Thus, although these two are the causes of the world, their substratum is Brahman, the Light of all lights. The Lord further says that all modifications—body, senses, mind, and intellect—and all qualities such as pleasure, pain, delusion, etc. (which will be described further in the Gita) are born of Prakriti, while the Self remains changeless and illuminates these modifications. Listen to what those qualities and modifications born of Prakriti are.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Both the Material Cause and the Soul too are beginningless, you should know this; you should also know that the modifications and Strands are born of the Material Cause.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Know that both Prakrti and the self (Purusa) are without beginning; know that all modifications and the attributes are born of Prakrti.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Know both Nature and also the individual soul [Prakrti is sometimes translated as matter, and purusa as spirit.-Tr.] to be verily without beginning; know the modifications as also the alities as born of Nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
To explain 'what is produced from what' (13.4), the Lord briefly describes Prakriti, its modifications, and Purusha. The 'gunas' refer to Sattva, etc. Since there is a subtle transformation in them during creation after dissolution, the modifications are mentioned separately. It is stated in the Madhucchandasa branch: 'Causes, effects, and gunas are threefold, from which subtle creation arises at birth.'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
To determine the nature of modifications, attributes, and Prakriti according to inquiry, the first half of the following verse is introduced—'Which indeed are those?' He explains the cause of bondage due to the beginninglessness of Purusha—'Purusha', etc. He explains the first half with 'effect', etc. The five organs of perception, five organs of action, mind, intellect, and ego—these are the thirteen instruments. Still, questioning how they are effects of Prakriti through perception of elements and objects, he says 'body', etc. Addressing the objection that gunas are not effects of Prakriti because they are not grasped here, he says 'and gunas', etc. He states the meaning thus established as 'thus'. Citing an alternative reading, he explains the non-difference of meaning with 'effect', etc. He provides another interpretation—'Or else'. The eleven senses and five objects—this sixteen-fold modification is the meaning of the word 'effect' here; Mahat, ego, and five subtle elements—these seven evolutes of Prakriti are the cause, and their originating source, agent, and support is Mula-Prakriti. He explains the purport of the second half as 'and Purusha'. He distinguishes him from the Supreme Self as 'the individual soul (Jiva)'. He states Jiva's consciousness for sustaining life as 'Knower of the field (Kshetrajna)'. He dispels its unconditioned nature as 'experiencer (Bhokta)'. To prove their causality of Samsara, he raises an objection—'How?' He states their causality through affirmative and negative assertions (anvaya-vyatireka)—'Here'. He shows the negative assertion with 'effect'. The Jiva, eternally free, does not have Samsara intrinsically—this is the meaning. Now he states the affirmative assertion—'When'. He concludes the result of anvaya, etc., with 'Therefore'. Objecting that wandering in Samsara is improper for the changeless Self—'Who then?' He answers: Experience is the direct perception of either pleasure or pain, and that belongs to the changeless witness as Samsara; such enjoyership constitutes its worldly existence—with 'pleasure', etc. End of verse explanation.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Know both Nature and Spirit to be beginningless, and know also that all modifications and modes are born of Nature. Nature is said to be the cause of producing action in the form of effect and instrument, while Spirit is said to be the cause in the experience of pleasure and pain.

Commentary -- In the third verse of this chapter, the Lord commanded Arjuna to hear four things regarding the Field: what it is, of what nature it is, what its modifications are, and from what what comes into being. Among these, 'what it is' was described in the fifth verse, and 'what its modifications are' was described in the sixth verse. 'Of what nature it is' will be described further in verses 26 and 27 of this chapter. Now, describing 'from what what comes into being', He explains that modifications and modes are born of Nature. Nature (Prakriti) here refers to the primordial matter which is the root cause of the entire Field (world). The seven evolutes (five elements, egoism, intellect) and sixteen modifications (ten senses, mind, five objects) are all effects of Nature, and Nature is their root cause. Purusha (Spirit) here refers to the Knower of the Field (Kshetrajna). Declaring both Nature and Spirit to be beginningless means that just as Jiva (individual soul) as a part of the Supreme is beginningless, so is Nature beginningless. However, while Nature has modes and undergoes modification, Purusha is entirely free from modes and modifications. Prakriti is the cause of actions and instruments, while Purusha experiences pleasure and pain due to identification with Prakriti. When realization of Truth occurs, the Purusha neither becomes the agent nor the enjoyer.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Know this Prakrti and Purusa (self) are uncreated and are beginningless. Know that the modifications, desire, hatred etc., which cause bondage, and the alities of modesty etc., which cause release, originate from Prakrti. The Prakrti, having no beginning, develops into the form of the body, and conjoint with the self, causes bondage through its own transformations such as desire and hatred. The same Prakrti, through its transformations like modesty etc., causes release. Such is the meaning.

The difference in the functions of Prakrti and Purusa in combination is stated -

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.20–13.23 jointly): Prakrtim etc. upto parah.  The Material Cause also is beginningless, because it has no other casue.  Modifications : the cloth and the like.  What is known as Material Cause is the basis for the process of cause-and-effect.  But, the Soul, because of Its importance, constitutes the enjoyer.  [Thus] the Material Cause and the Soul have verily an existence of interdependence just as that of the lame and the blind.  Hence,  the nature of the  Soul is described by the authors of the scriptures by nomenclatures having different forms such as  'the Spectator' and so on.  The meaning, intended here is this : The Material Cause, Its modifications, the fourteen types of creation and also the Soul - this is all beginningless and  perennial as it is completely illuminated by the category Brahman and is identical with it.										
  Hence  [the Bhagavat] said :

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Viddhi, know; ubhau, both; prakrtim Nature; and also the purusam, individual soul;-these two; Nature and the soul. the aspects of God-to be api, verily; anadi, without beginning. Those two that have no beginning (adi), are anadi. Since the godhood of God is eternal, therefore it is logical that even His aspects also should have eternality. For God's god-hood consists verily in having the two aspects. Those two aspects through which God becomes the cause of creation, continuance and dissolution of the Universe, and which are beginningless, are the sources of mundane existence.
Some interpret the phrase anadi in the tatpurusa [Tatpurusa: Name of a class of compounds in which the first member determines the sense of the other members, or in which the last member is defined or alified by the first, without losing its original independence.-V.S.A.] sense of na adi, not primeval (not cause). (According to them) thery indeed is established the causality of God. Again, if Nature and soul themselves be eternal, the mundane existence would surely be their creation, and the causality of the mundane existence would not be God's.
That is wrong because, there being nothing to rule over before the emergence of Nature and soul, there will arise the contingency of God ceasing to be God! And if the mundane state be uncaused [Uncaused, i.e. not caused by Nature and soul, but by God independently of those two aspects.] there arises the contingency of the absence of Liberation, [If God were. Himself the sole cause of mundane existence, independently of His two aspects, then it would be endless because there would be nothing to prevent liberated souls from being put under bondage again.] the scriptures becoming useless, and the absence of bondage and freedom. On the other hand, all these become justifiable if God and the two aspects be eternal.
How?
Viddhi, know; the vikaran, modifications that will be spoken of-the intellect etc., the body and the organs; ca eva, as also; gunan, the alities (sattva etc.)-manifest in the form of the mental states of happiness, sorrow and attachment; as prakriti-sambhavan, born of Nature. Nature, Maya, is the power of God, which is the cause of the modifications and which consists of the three alities. Those modifications and alities, which have that Nature as their source,-know those modifications and alities as 'born of Nature', as transformations of Nature.
Which again, are those modifications and alities born of Nature?

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Objection: Why is it stated here 'Know Prakriti and Purusha', which was not explicitly promised earlier? Answer: Not so. In explaining the Field with its characteristics as promised in 'what it is like' (13.4), why was it not stated earlier? To this he says, 'from what what is produced' (13.4). The description of the Impeller (Paramatman) requires knowledge of the impelled (Kshetra). The entire realm of conscious and unconscious entities other than God is called Kshetra. Here 'Prakriti' refers to the 24 principles, and 'Purusha' refers to Jiva. Gunas and modifications originate from Prakriti alone.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Now, desiring to explain the Purusha-tattva promised earlier in 'who he is and what his powers are' (13.4), the Lord describes in five verses the fruitfulness of all-causality of Prakriti and Atman, which are of distinct natures yet non-different from the Cause. According to Sankhya doctrine here, both Prakriti and Purusha are beginningless. Prakriti is twofold as cause and effect—effect-form Jiva-upadhi combined with avidya, and cause-form Maya of Paramatman. Purusha is also twofold—the primary source Purusha and Jiva-purushas as His parts. Know that modifications (desire, hatred) causing bondage and gunas (sattva, etc.) causing liberation are born of Prakriti.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
With the preceding text, 'what the Field is and what it is like' (13.4) has been explained. Now 'what its modifications are, what is produced from what, who he is, and what his powers are' remains to be explained. Know both Prakriti and Purusha to be beginningless. Those without a cause are beginningless. Prakriti is beginningless as the cause of the entire universe, and Purusha is beginningless due to past karma. Know the sixteen modifications (five elements, eleven senses) and gunas (sattva, rajas, tamas) to be caused by Prakriti alone.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Thus 'what the Field is and what it is like' was elaborated. Now the Lord elaborates on 'what its modifications are, what is produced from what, who he is, and what his powers are' in five verses by explaining the causality of Prakriti and Purusha in Samsara. Know both Prakriti and Purusha to be beginningless. Prakriti is beginningless as the power of the eternal Lord, and Purusha is beginningless as His part. Know modifications like body-senses and quality-outcomes like pleasure, pain, and delusion to be born of Prakriti.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
In Chapter 7, describing God's two natures (Apara and Para as Field and Knower of the Field), it was said that all beings originate from them. In this chapter, introducing both through 'Idam Shariram', both Prakriti and Purusha are declared beginningless. Being without cause, they are beginningless. As God is eternal, His natures must also be eternal. Know modifications from intellect down to body-senses and the three gunas (pleasure, pain, delusion) to be transformations born of Prakriti.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Now the Lord clarifies the compiled meaning of 'cause of bondage' starting with 'Prakriti and Purusha'. Both Prakriti and Purusha are associated from beginningless time. The word 'modification' here refers to effects of the Field, and 'guna' refers to virtues like modesty as well as Sattva, etc. Modifications causing bondage (desire, anger) and attributes causing release (modesty, etc.) are both produced from Prakriti.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus 'what the Field is and what it is like' (13.4) was described. Now in five verses beginning with 'what its modifications are', He describes their nature. Know Prakriti, capable of all creation, to be beginningless as Divine energy; and Purusha, the enjoyer of its aesthetic rasa, to be beginningless as a divine portion (amsa). Know body-sense modifications and pleasure-pain-delusion attributes to be born of Prakriti.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Thus the Field named body, its 23 evolutes, and modifications were stated. Now He explains in three verses what arises from what between Field and Field-knower. The lower nature (Apara Prakriti) of Chapter 7 is 'Prakriti' here, and the higher nature (Para Prakriti, Jiva) is 'Purusha' here. Joined together they produce Samsara, and their separation is release. Know both to be beginningless. Know modifications like desire and attributes like intellect-senses to be born of Prakriti.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Material nature and the living entities should be understood to be beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter are products of material nature.

 By the knowledge given in this chapter, one can understand the body (the field of activities) and the knowers of the body (both the individual soul and the Supersoul). The body is the field of activity and is composed of material nature. The individual soul that is embodied and enjoying the activities of the body is the puruṣa, or the living entity. He is one knower, and the other is the Supersoul. Of course, it is to be understood that both the Supersoul and the individual entity are different manifestations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The living entity is in the category of His energy, and the Supersoul is in the category of His personal expansion. Both material nature and the living entity are eternal. That is to say that they existed before the creation. The material manifestation is from the energy of the Supreme Lord, and so also are the living entities, but the living entities are of the superior energy. Both the living entities and material nature existed before this cosmos was manifested. Material nature was absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mahā-viṣṇu, and when it was required, it was manifested by the agency of the mahat-tattva. Similarly, the living entities are also in Him, and because they are conditioned, they are averse to serving the Supreme Lord. Thus they are not allowed to enter into the spiritual sky. But with the coming forth of material nature these living entities are again given a chance to act in the material world and prepare themselves to enter into the spiritual world. That is the mystery of this material creation. Actually the living entity is originally the spiritual part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, but due to his rebellious nature, he is conditioned within material nature. It really does not matter how these living entities or superior entities of the Supreme Lord have come in contact with material nature. The Supreme Personality of Godhead knows, however, how and why this actually took place. In the scriptures the Lord says that those attracted by this material nature are undergoing a hard struggle for existence. But we should know it with certainty from the descriptions of these few verses that all transformations and influences of material nature by the three modes are also productions of material nature. All transformations and variety in respect to living entities are due to the body. As far as spirit is concerned, living entities are all the same.