Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
lobhaḥ pravṛttirārambhaḥ karmaṇāmaśamaḥ spṛhā .
rajasyetāni jāyante vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha

Word Meanings:
लोभः - greed
प्रवृत्तिः - activity
आरम्भः - the undertaking
कर्मणाम् - of actions
अशमः - restlessness
स्पृहा - longing
रजसि - in Rajas
एतानि - these
जायन्ते - arise
विवृद्धे - having become predominant
भरतर्षभ - O best of the Bharatas

Life Application:
When greed, activity, undertaking of works, restlessness, and longing arise, know that passion is predominant.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O best of the Bharatas, when the mode of passion (Rajas) is predominant, greed, activity (general movement), undertaking of actions, lack of tranquillity, and craving—all these arise.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Greed, activity, the undertaking of actions, restlessness, longing  these arise when Rajas is predominant, O Arjuna.

लोभः greed? प्रवृत्तिः activity? आरम्भः the undertaking? कर्मणाम् of actions? अशमः restlessness? स्पृहा longing? रजसि in Rajas? एतानि these? जायन्ते arise? विवृद्धे having become predominant? भरतर्षभ O best of the Bharatas (or O Lord of the Bharatas).Commentary Greed Covetousness Desire to appropriate the property of others a desire to possess more wealth though one has sufficient already.Pravritti Action in general.Asamah Restlessness being agitated by joy? attachment? etc. I will do this and then I wil take up that action. After finishing the second? I will take up the third? and so on. There is no end to the continuity of desire? will and action. This is called Asama or restlessness.Spriha Thirsting or longing for all sensual objects in general.These are the characteristic marks that indicate that Rajas is predominant.Do not mistake Rajasic restlessness or Rajasic movements for Karma Yoga or divine activity. People may say that they are doing selfless service to the world? but if you analyse their motives,there will be the taint of personal desire in some form or other. Many persons cannot sit iet even for a moment. They think that moving about here and there or doing some action or other is to full of life. The Yogi or sage who sits still by calming the mind? who does nothing at all physically? is the most active man in the whole world whereas the man who runs here and there and who is always very busy does nothing at all. This may be paradoxical to you. Very few can comprehend the truth of this statement. Sattva is intense activity. A wheel that revolves very rapidly appears to be at rest. So is Sattva. So is a Sattvic man.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
O best of Indians! Avarice, the impulse to act and the beginning of action itself are all due to the dominance of Passion.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Here, Lord Krishna enumerates the main characteristics of the mode of passion (Rajas). In the order in which they are mentioned, we see that each successive symptom arises from the preceding one. The desire for another's wealth is called greed (lobha), which is never satisfied. In a greedy person arises activity (pravritti)—that is, he becomes hyperactive and cannot sit still. Driven by excessive greed, his actions become purely selfish, indicated here by the term 'undertaking of actions' (arambha). A person controlled by selfishness and greed cannot attain shama, or peace. Adi Shankaracharya explains 'ashama' as the tendency toward joy, attachment, and so on. This means that such a person is constantly tossed between joy and sorrow upon obtaining the agreeable or disagreeable; in such a state, how can he find peace? As a result of his own deeds, he finds himself in situations that drive him into increasingly bitter cruelty, low immorality, and even crimes like murder, shattering his inner peace. Overpowered by Rajas, this person also comes under the sway of craving (spriha)—the longing for sense pleasures. This endless desire to acquire unobtained objects and gain is called spriha. In short, under the contagious influence of Rajas, our mental personality is tormented by its own restless tendencies, expressing as endless plans, exhausting tasks, distressing desires, painful hankerings, maddening greed, and agonizing anxieties. When such a person acts in society, his suffering is not confined to himself alone, but like a contagious disease, it distresses thousands of people around him.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Greed, exertion, undertaking of actions, unrest, and craving-these are born when the Rajas increases predominantly, O chief of the Bharatas !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Greed, activity, undertaking of work, unrest and longing - these arise, O Arjuna, when Rajas prevails.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O best of the Bharata dynasty, when rajas becomes predominant, these come into being: avarice, movement, undertaking of actions, unrest and hankering.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Anandagiri states the characteristics of exceedingly manifest Rajas in the words 'rajasa iti'. He asks about the object of 'arambha' (undertaking), which is synonymous with initiation—'kasyeti' (of what?). He specifies desirable (kamya), prohibited (nishiddha), and worldly actions as the objects by the word 'karmanam'. 'Asamaha' implies the non-cessation (restlessness) of the outer and inner organs. The idea is that the increase of Rajas should be understood from the manifestation of greed and other symptoms.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Arjuna, best of the Bharata dynasty! On the increase of Rajas, greed, activity, undertaking of actions, restlessness, and longing—these mental tendencies arise.

Commentary—'Lobhah': Even when having sufficient things for subsistence, the desire to increase them further is called 'greed'. However, the natural increase of those things is not called greed. For example, if someone does farming and more grain is produced, or does business and makes more profit, such natural increase of items or money is not called greed, nor is such increase faulty.

'Pravrittih': Engaging in any work is called 'activity'. But engaging in work without attraction and aversion is not faulty; because such activity exists even in a great soul who has transcended the gunas (Gita 14.22). Engaging in activity with attachment, i.e., with the desire for pleasure, comfort, wealth, etc., is what is faulty.

'Arambhah karmanama': Doing new deeds, starting new businesses, opening new factories, opening new shops, etc., to be called wealthy and great in the world, or to get respect, honor, praise, etc., is the 'undertaking of actions'.

There is a difference between activity (pravritti) and undertaking (arambha). Activity occurs in response to circumstances, and there is also withdrawal from action. But starting new actions with the objective of enjoyment and accumulation is 'arambha'.

Having attained human birth, the sole objective should be the realization of the Supreme Self, and there should be no objective of enjoyment or accumulation at all. From this perspective, in Bhakti Yoga and Jnana Yoga, the phrase 'sarvarambha-parityagi' (12.16, 14.25) instructs the complete abandonment of all undertakings. In Karma Yoga, undertakings of action do happen, but all those undertakings are free from desire and selfish motive (Gita 4.19). Such undertakings in Karma Yoga are not faulty either, because Karma Yoga prescribes performance of duty, and without performing actions a Karma Yogi cannot be established in yoga (equanimity) (6.3). Therefore, if actions are undertaken according to the circumstances without attachment, those undertakings are not truly 'undertakings', but mere activities, because they eradicate the attachment to action. Since they lead to dispassion, they are not faulty.

'Ashamah': The existence of restlessness and turmoil in the inner conscience is called ashama. When things are not obtained according to one's desires (wealth, property, fame, prestige, etc.), then restlessness and turmoil occur in the mind. Upon abandoning desire, this restlessness ceases to exist.

'Spriha': Spriha means craving or caring for objects. For instance, needing food when hungry, water when thirsty, clothes when cold. In reality, being aware of hunger, thirst, or cold is not faulty; rather, desiring that food, water, etc. be obtained is what is faulty. A seeker should abandon this desire because no object is under the control of desire.

'Rajasy etani jayante vivriddhe bharatarshabha': When Rajas increases within, the above-mentioned tendencies of greed, activity, etc. increase. At such a time, a seeker should reflect that one's livelihood is already going on, so what more does one need? Reflecting thus, one should eradicate the tendencies of Rajas and become indifferent to them.

Relation: What are the characteristics of increased Tamas?—this is explained in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Greed' is the tendency not to spend one's own property. 'Activity' is the disposition to be active devoid of any purpose. 'Undertaking of works' is engagement in works which yield fruits. 'Unrest' is absence of rest of sense-activities. 'Longing' is the desire for sense objects. These predominate when Rajas has increased. The meaning is that whenever greed etc., prevail, then one should know that Rajas has very much increased.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 14.11–14.13 jointly): Sarva-etc.  upto kurunandana. In all the gates : in all the sense-organs. Greed etc., are born in succession when  the Rajas dominates.  Similarly, absence of mental illumination and so on arise in succession only at the time of the increase of the Tamas.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O best of the Bharata dynasty, when the ality of rajas vivrddhe, becomes predominant; etani, these indications; jayante, come into being; lobhah, avarice, the desire to appropriate other's possessions; pravrtih, movement in general; arambhah, undertaking;-of what?-karmanam, of actions; asamah, unrest, lack of tranillity-(i.e.) manifestation of joy, attachment, etc.; and sprha, hankering, desire in general for all things.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Lobha iti': Greed indeed is stinginess (karpanyam). 'Pravritti' is the restless disposition even without a specific purpose. 'Arambha' is the effort/endeavor toward actions.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Lobha' is the desire that continuously increases even upon receiving immense wealth; that is to say, a special desire that is not satiated by obtaining its object. 'Pravritti' is continuous striving. 'Arambhah karmanam' is the effort in activities involving great wealth, expenditure, and exertion, such as desirable (kamya), prohibited (nishiddha), worldly, and construction of large mansions, etc. 'Ashama' is the non-cessation of the stream of resolves like 'Having done this, I shall do that'. 'Spriha' is the desire to acquire by any means high or low, or other people's wealth, as soon as seen. When Rajas, which is of the nature of attachment, increases, these indications characterized by attachment arise, O best of the Bharatas! The meaning is that by these marks one should know that Rajas has increased.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore, 'Lobha iti': Greed is the desire that increases repeatedly even when wealth etc. is coming in abundance. 'Pravritti' is the state of constantly being engaged in action. 'Karmanam arambhah' is the endeavor toward constructing houses etc. 'Ashamah' is the non-ceasing of resolutions and doubts like 'having done this, I will do that'. 'Spriha' is the urge to grasp objects high or low as soon as they are seen. When Rajas has increased, these indications arise. The meaning is that by these marks one should know the increase of the mode of passion.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having stated the symptoms of manifest Sattva, Dhanapati states those of manifest Rajas. 'Lobha' is covetousness for others' wealth despite having an abundance of one's own. 'Pravritti' is general effort or worldly activity. 'Arambha' is the endeavor in actions concerning desirable, prohibited, and worldly affairs. 'Ashama' is the non-cessation of joy, attachment, and related tendencies. 'Spriha' is thirst for all ordinary objects. When the mode of passion increases, these indications arise. The idea is that by perceiving greed etc., one should know the increase of Rajas. By addressing him as 'O best of the Bharatas!', Lord Krishna indicates: 'You are supreme among the Bharatas and unfit to adopt the characteristics of Rajas.'

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In 'lobhah pravrittih', etc., to avoid tautology with the word 'spriha', Venkatanatha explains the conventional refined meaning of 'lobha' as: 'the disposition to not part with one's own property'. The word 'arambha' is used comprehensively for goal-oriented activity; this is confirmed by its collocation with 'karmanam'. Thus, 'arambha' here refers to actions that yield seen (worldly) or unseen (spiritual) fruits, such as agriculture or rituals. Consequently, the word 'pravritti' here refers to purposeless movements excluded from that, such as cutting grass or twitching limbs; hence he says: 'the disposition to move even without any purpose'. To avoid tautology with both, 'ashama' here refers to sensory excitation causing activity, stated as 'non-cessation of the senses'. As in the previous verse, he states that this verse describes indications of the increase of the gunas—'yada iti'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Having thus stated the knowledge of Sattva, Purushottamji states the nature of the knowledge of Rajas—'Lobha iti'. 'Lobha' (greed) is when, despite having money suitable for honest dealing granted by God's will for divine service, due to worldly attachment the mind wanders here and there seeking more wealth, leading to exertion. 'Pravritti' is performing actions. 'Karmanam arambhah' is creating worldly objects for personal enjoyment. 'Ashamah' is restlessness, mental agitation caused by thoughts such as 'In the morning I must do this, today I did that'. 'Spriha' is desiring even things unsuitable for oneself. When Rajas increases, these arise; upon their arising, one should know the increase of Rajas. The address 'O best of the Bharatas!' is meant to show Arjuna's freedom from this fault due to his lack of desire for kingdom and other things.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Lobha' is greed for more than what is obtained. 'Pravritti' is engaging in Agnihotra rituals, etc. 'Arambha' is initiating construction of houses, etc. 'Ashama' of actions is the non-ceasing of works, whether good or bad. 'Spriha' is the desire to acquire seen wealth of others, etc. When Rajas increases, these indications arise, O best of the Bharatas!

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O chief of the Bhāratas, when there is an increase in the mode of passion the symptoms of great attachment, fruitive activity, intense endeavor, and uncontrollable desire and hankering develop.

 One in the mode of passion is never satisfied with the position he has already acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants to construct a residential house, he tries his best to have a palatial house, as if he would be able to reside in that house eternally. And he develops a great hankering for sense gratification. There is no end to sense gratification. He always wants to remain with his family and in his house and to continue the process of sense gratification. There is no cessation of this. All these symptoms should be understood as characteristic of the mode of passion.