Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
tasmādomityudāhṛtya yajñadānatapaḥkriyāḥ .
pravartante vidhānoktāḥ satataṃ brahmavādinām

Word Meanings:
तस्मात् - therefore
इति - thus
उदाहृत्य - uttering
यज्ञदानतपःक्रियाः - the acts of sacrifice
प्रवर्तन्ते - begin
विधानोक्ताः - prescribed by scriptural ordinance
सततम् - always
ब्रह्मवादिनाम् - of the expounders of the Vedas

Life Application:
Therefore, acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity enjoined by scripture are begun uttering 'Om' by knowers of Brahman.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Therefore, the scripture-prescribed acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity of the expounders of the Vedas always commence after uttering the syllable 'OM'.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Therefore, with the utterance of "Om" are the acts of sacrifice, gift and austerity as enjoined in the scriptures, always begun by the students of Brahman.

तस्मात् therefore?  Om? इति thus? उदाहृत्य uttering? यज्ञदानतपःक्रियाः the acts of sacrifice? gift and austerity? प्रवर्तन्ते begin? विधानोक्ताः as enjoined in the scriptures? सततम् always? ब्रह्मवादिनाम् of the students of Brahman.  Commentary Those who are knowers of the scriptures have a vivid impression of Om in their minds by means of meditation and then they will utter the Pranava with the proper attitude and feeling. Then meditating on Om and uttering it? they perform the sacrifices. Just as a hillstick is very useful in climbing a hill? just as a boat is very useful in crossing a river? so also Om is very useful and important at the commencement of an action or sacrifice.It is not desirable to renounce actions or sacrifices to attain union with the Lord. What is wanted is total and perfect surrender of all actions to God. Sacrifice? charity and austerity are not hindrances to the attainment of Selfrealisation on the contrary the attainment of liberation is rendered easy by their performance without any selfish desires or egoism.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Therefore all acts of sacrifice, gifts and austerities, prescribed by the scriptures, are always begun by those who understand the Spirit with the word Om.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
By 'Brahmavadis' (expounders of the Vedas), it refers to sattvic seekers. Chanting 'OM' at the start of every scripture-ordained activity ensures that the ego is surrendered to the Lord, making the seeker efficient, selfless, and pure in action.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Therefore, the scripture-prescribed acts of sacrifice, gift and austerity of those who are habituated to have Brahman-discourses, commence (or take place) invariably, with the utterance of  OM.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Therefore, the Veda-enjoined sacrificial acts, gifts and austerity by these expounders of the Veda, or those belonging to the first three stations are always and at all times begun after pronouncing Om at the beginning.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Therefore, acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity as prescribed through injunctions, of those who study and expound the Vedas, always commence after uttering the syllable Om.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that 'Brahman' in the word 'Brahmavadinam' refers to the Veda. Because the Brahmanas, Vedas, and sacrifices were created along with the triple name, the scripture-ordained activities of those who follow the Vedas always commence after pronouncing the syllable 'OM'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Therefore, all Veda-enjoined acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity performed by the expounders of the Vedas are always begun after pronouncing the syllable 'OM'.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'Brahmavadinam' refers to those who accept the authority of the Vedas. Pronouncing 'OM' at the beginning of any Vedic recitation, sacrifice, gift, or austerity is essential, as without 'OM' the hymns do not yield fruits. 'OM' represents the root of all Vedas and Gayle. Beginning with 'OM' ensures that the act is aligned with the Supreme and is freed from defects.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
After pronouncing Om, the Vedas are recited. Thus the connection of the syllable Om with the Vedas and the rituals enjoined in the Vedas such as sacrifices has been described. As the Vedas are connected with the word Om, all belonging to the three stations of life who memorise the Vedas and perform the rituals inculcated in them, are included in the expression, 'expounders of the Vedas.'

Now, He describes the manner by which the word Tat is connected with them:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.23–17.27 jointly): Om etc. upto abhidhiyate.  An indication of the Brahman i.e., an act of facing (or aiming at)  the Brahman is made by these  three words viz.,  OM, TAT and SAT.  Of  them, Om indicates that 'This purport of the scriptures is [to be]  accepted as long as one has bodily connection'.

The pronoun TAT, which denotes generality and which is incapable of denoting exclusively a particular, mentions, as far as the Brahman is concerned, the absence of intention for fruit.  An intention is not possible without reference to something particular. No doubt  [TAT] may denote all particulars  [in general]. But it would lead to intending the fruits and the doer-ship with regard to all [in general].  Even then [the Brahman] cannot have connection with any particular fruit.

The Vedic word SAT denotes 'praise'.  The act, like this sacrifice etc., though performed, turns out to be an act of the Tamas (evil act) if it is performed with the idea, 'It is an evil act'.  Further, what is performed  with an intention for a particular fruit is not praiseworthy, and it causes nothing but bondage. Therefore, those, who bear in mind, 'This is a thing to be performed' - they are not fettered, even though they perform acts like sacrifice etc.  With this idea only, it has been said in the Adiparvan as -

'The austerity is not dirt, nor the [Vedic] study, nor the natural ritual enjoined by the Vedas, and nor the act of earning wealth by all efforts.  But, if they are struck by mind, they themselves become dirt.' (MB, Adi. i, 210).

[Here in this passage]  dirt that which fetters.  Natural :  [That is, ordained ], such as - 'Without expecting anything, a Brahman should learn the Vedas etc., together with their six subsidiaries' etc.

By all effort :  by the act that is suitable and is well known in the scriptures and in the worldly practice.  By mind :  by the mind that is yoked to the triad of the Strands, Sattva etc.  [Those actions that]  have been simply ruined  [by that mind], are binding and not otherwise.  This is the idea here.

Therefore, the acts like sacrifice etc., and the acts, like acquiring  [Wealth] etc., for that purpose, have to be performed as being inevitable as long as the body exists.

Or, perhaps, the word  OM  conveys  [with regard to the Brahman]  the idea of That in Which the entire universe has been totally calmed down.  TAT conveys the idea of That of the nature of Sovereign  Independence of Will, which is nothing but comprehending the rising waves in the form of the universe.  And the word SAT denotes the act of manifestation by the Brahman - even though It is complete in Itself - as [the universe]  having  varied nature, a manifestation that  causes differences  (or duality) expanding under the weight of its Sovereign  Independence of Will.  Hence it has been said  'In the sense of manifesting as beings and in the sense of manifesting  perfectly  [SAT is employed].'  Thus, having in front  [as a cause]  that aspect  (the Soul) of  highly tranquil nature; and having in the  centre that aspect which is well connected with desire-waves viz., the desire to make gift, the desire to perform sacrifice and the desire to observe penance; this final body radiates  (or dances)  filled with a group of activities, such as  offering gift, performing sacrifice and observing austerity, and of what are conducive to them.  This triad is indeed simultaneously the inherent nature of the Unhindered One (the Soul).  So, what fruit could be there ?  And to whom ?  How ?  Whence ?  Where ?  And by what means ?

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tasmat, therefore; yajna-dana-tapah, kriyah, acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity-acts in the form of sacrifice etc.; vidhana-uktah, as prescribed through injunctions, as ordained by the scriptures; brahma-vadinam, of those who study and expound the Vedas; satatam, always; pravartante, commence; udahrtya, after uttering; om iti, the syllable Om.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that the connection of the syllable 'OM' is being described first. It is clear that the acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity of those who recite Veda always begin with the utterance of OM.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains the individual parts of the designation 'OM TAT SAT' in the next four verses, starting with 'OM' in this verse. Since 'OM' is the famous name of Brahman, all scripture-ordained activities of the expounders of Vedas (brahmavadinam) always proceed after uttering OM, which removes all deficiencies and makes the ritual flawless.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that to show the glory of each part of the triple name, the Lord describes the syllable 'OM'. When the expounders of Vedas utter 'OM' before beginning sacrifices, gifts, and austerities, those actions are rendered perfect and flawless despite any minor omissions in their performance.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that since 'OM TAT SAT' is the designation of Brahman and the cause of Brahmanas, Vedas, and sacrifices, therefore all Veda-enjoined acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity of those who expound the Vedas always begin with the utterance of OM.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the syllable 'OM' is connected with Veda recitation. By beginning Veda recitation and sacrifices with 'OM', the expounders of Vedas (brahmavadinam) ensure that their actions are continuously protected and aligned with the Supreme, regardless of time restrictions.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that 'OM' is the root of Veda-enjoined actions. Uttering 'OM' before beginning any sacrifice, gift, or austerity invokes the Supreme and makes the actions faultless.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that since the creation of Brahmanas, Vedas, and sacrifices began with the power of this triple name, therefore, by uttering the first name 'OM', the Veda-enjoined acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity of those who follow the Vedas are always begun. The scriptures state that priests in a sacrifice always start their duties (recitations, songs, and responses) by uttering OM.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Therefore, transcendentalists undertaking performances of sacrifice, charity and penance in accordance with scriptural regulations begin always with oṁ, to attain the Supreme.

 Oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam ( Ṛg Veda 1.22.20). The lotus feet of Viṣṇu are the supreme devotional platform. The performance of everything on behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead assures the perfection of all activity.