Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
tejaḥ kṣamā dhṛtiḥ śaucamadroho nātimānitā .
bhavanti sampadaṃ daivīmabhijātasya bhārata

Word Meanings:
तेजः - vigour
क्षमा - forgiveness
धृतिः - fortitude
शौचम् - purity
अद्रोहः - absence of hatred
नातिमानिता - absence of overpride
भवन्ति - belong
सम्पदम् - state
दैवीम् - divine
अभिजातस्य - to the one born
भारत - O descendant of Bharata

Life Application:
Embody vigor, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, absence of hatred, and freedom from excessive pride as divine traits.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, absence of hatred, and absence of pride—these belong to the one born for a divine state, O descendant of Bharata.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, absence of hatred, absence of pride  these belong to the one born for a divine state, O Arjuna.

तेजः vigour? क्षमा forgiveness? धृतिः fortitude? शौचम् purity? अद्रोहः absence of hatred? नातिमानिता absence of overpride? भवन्ति belong? सम्पदम् state? दैवीम् divine? अभिजातस्य to the one born for? भारत O descendant of Bharata (Arjuna).Commentary Tejas Vigour? energy? brilliance or lustre of the skin. The aspirant who is bent on attaining salvation marches boldly on the spiritual path. Nothing can tempt him or slacken his progress. This unbroken progress towards the realisation of the Self or the Absolute is lustre. It overcomes the downward pull of Tamas.Kshama Forgiveness. He who is endowed with this virtue does not exhibit anger even when he is insulted? ruked or beaten? although he is strong enough to take vengeance. He is unaffected by the insult or injury.Dhriti The sage absorbs within himself all calamities. He is steadfast even when he is in very adverse and trying conditions this is a particular Sattvic Vritti or state of mind which removes depression or exhaustion of the body and senses when they sink down. An aspirant who is endowed with this divine attribute never gets disheartened? even when he is under severe trials and difficulties or tribulations. Dhriti is a divine pickmeup (tonic) when the body and the senses are in a state of low spirits or dejection.Saucham Purity. This is of two kinds? viz.? external and internal. External purity is achieved by means of earth and water. The mind and heart (intellect) are freed from Maya (deception? lust? anger? greed? pride? jealousy? hypocrisy? likes and dislikes) by the practice of celibacy? forgiveness? friendliness? charity? humility? nobilit? love? complacency? compassion? etc. -- this is internal purity. This is more important than external purity.Adroha Absence of hatred? absence of desire to injure others.Atimanita is great pride. A proud man thinks that he is superior to others and that he is worthy of being honoured by others. Naatimanita is the opposite of this ality.Tejas? Kshama and Dhriti are the special alities or Dharmas of the Kshatriyas (warrior class). These are the Sattvic alities of Kshatriyas. Saucham and Adroha are the special Dharmas of the Vaisyas. They are the Sattvic alities of the Vaisyas (merchant class). Absence of pride is the special Dharma of the Sudras (servant class). It is a Sattvic ality that belongs to the Sudras.The divine wealth or Daivi Sampat consists of twentysix attributes. This is a rare gift from the Lord. This is an inexhaustible wealth which cannot be taken away by dacoits. This helps the aspirant attain the imperishable and immacultate Brahmic seat. It is the shortcut to the realm of eternal bliss or Moksha.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Valour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, freedom from hate and vanity; these are his who possesses the Godly Qualities, O Arjuna!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, absence of hatred, and absence of pride—these, O descendant of Bharata, belong to one born destined for a divine state.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that 'tejas' (vigour) is the dynamic charisma of a wise person, visible in their intellectual clarity and joyous energy. 'Kshama' (forgiveness) is the inner peace and strength maintained even in the face of great opposition. 'Dhriti' (fortitude) is the secret mental energy that prevents despair and encourages consistent effort. 'Saucham' (purity) refers to both environment/physical cleanliness and mental purity. 'Adroha' (absence of malice) naturally arises from realizing oneness with all. 'Na atimanita' (absence of pride) keeps a person free from vanity, making life light and free from unnecessary burdens. Cultivating these 26 godly qualities is the key to spiritual liberation.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Vital power, forgiveness, fortitude, contenment, absence of treachery and absence of excessive pride-these are in the person who is born for divine wealth, O Descendant of Bharata !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Grandeur, patience, fortitude, purity, freedom from hatred, and from over-pride - these, O Arjuna, belong to him who is born to a divine destiny.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, freedom from malice, absence of haughtiness-these, O scion of the Bharata dynasty, are (the alties) of one born destined to have the divine nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that 'kshama' (forgiveness) means not causing harm to someone who has done wrong, even when one has the capability to retaliate.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that 'kshama' differs from 'akrodha' (absence of anger) because 'akrodha' is the non-generation of anger, while 'kshama' is not reacting even when anger arises and one is capable of punishment. 'Saucham' (purity) is both clay/water physical cleanliness and mental purity from deceit.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity of body, absence of malice, and absence of pride—O descendant of Bharata, all these are the marks of a person born with divine qualities.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'tejas' (vigour) is the spiritual aura of a saint which naturally inspires others to abandon vice. Forgiveness (kshama) must be selfless, not out of fear or selfishness. Fortitude (dhriti) keeps the seeker steady in both pain and pleasure. Purity (saucham) has four dimensions: physical, verbal, familial, and financial. Honest earning and charity purify wealth. A godly seeker attributes all virtues to the grace of God, avoiding pride (naatimanita).

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Grandeur' is the ality by virtue of which one cannot be overpowered by the wicked. 'Forgiveness' is freedom from the feelings of antagonism towards others even when they cause injury to oneself. 'Fortitude' is the sense of determination to do one's own duty even under conditions of great danger. 'Purity' is fitness of the body and the mind as prescribd in the scriptures for the performance of sacred deeds. 'Freedom from hatred' is non-interference with others, viz., absence of interference in the actions of others according to their wish. 'Over-pride' (Atimanita) is having unbridled self-esteem; freedom from misplaced pride is meant here.

These are the virtues that are found in one who is born for the 'divine destiny.' The destiny associated with the divinities is divine. The divinities are those who are devoted to carry out the ?ndments of the Lord. It is their destiny. It is obedience to the ?ndments of the Lord. The meaning is that these are endowments in those who are born with a tendency or disposition towards them and seek to attain their fulfilment.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.1–16.5 jointly): It has been stated  [at the end of the last chapter] that  'by understanding this' etc.  The thing called  'understanding' comes to be  [in  the following] manner :  After the knowledge, born from hearing  [the scriptures etc.],  there arises a thought-process consisting of the logical analysis,  deliberation and  deep meditation that take the form 'This (what is taught in the scriptures etc.)  is like this'.  The above thought-process is of the nature  of investigation, critical examination and judgement.  From this thought-process one gains a good knowledge of a well practised from i.e., a contemplation of that object, free from the humiliation (influence) of different category.  When this is gained, understanding is achieved  Hence, it will be declared :
 'By critically examining in this way fully, act as you please'.  (Ch. XVIII, 63).
 
Here, only the preceptor and the scripture are mainly capable of creating the scriptural knowledge.  But in producing reasoning, deliberation and meditation the main cause is the capacity to examine critically a thing and  it is a special attribute of the pupil and it is an important one.  Therefore, with an idea that this is in Arjuna and with an intention to add a preparatory note to the purposeful statement  'By critically examining this, [act as you please]'; the Bhagavat, the preceptor, says  'Fearlessness etc.'
 
The Ignorance, born of the Tamas (Stand) occupies the devilish side.  This is repelled  (or removed) by the well augmented wisdom that takes hold of the divine part.  This is the nature of things [under estion]  'You  (Arjuna) have taken refuge in the divine part viz., wisdom, born of the Sattva (Strand).  Therefore shirking off the internal Ignorance in the nature of delusion, you should undertake the action, that has the sanction of the scriptures and that is of the nature of eradicating the external foe having the form of ignorance.'  Thus commences the [present] chapter.  Hence -
 Abhayam etc., upto pandava.  These are the identification marks of a person of divine parts.  [Hence] they are clearly identified.  Self-restraint :  subduing the sense organs.  Thought-lessness :  the perfarmance of action without examining the antecedent and the seel; its absence is the absence of thought-lessness.  Vital power :  the act of casting away [all] limitations by taking hold energy in the Self.  [All] this is the divine wealth and this is for your total emancipation, as it destroys craving.  Therefore, don't get sorrow like 'Having killed brothers etc., how can I (Arjuna) enjoy pleasure ?'  [The idea of] the rest  [of passage] is clear.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tajah, vigour, not the brightness of the skin; ksama, forgiveness, absence of internal perturbation when offened or assulated-absence of anger has been explained by us as the calming down of a perturbed mind; thus, forgiveness and absence of anger are distinguished; dhrtih, fortitude, a particular function of the mind which removes the tedium of the body and organs when they become exhausted, and being rejuvenated by which the body and organs do not feel any fatigue; saucam, purity-is of two kinds: external, with the help of earth and water; and internal, the cleanliness of mind and intellect, the absence of such impurities as trickery, attachment, etc.; purity of these two kinds; adrohah, freedom from malice, absence of the desire to injure others, absence of hatred; na-atimanita, absence of haughtiness-too much self-esteem (mana) is atimanah; one having that is atimani; its abstract form is atimanita; absence of that, na-atimanita, i.e., absence of the feeling of one's being too honourable. These (alities) beginning with fearlessness and ending with this, O scion of the Bharata dynasty, bhavanti, are; (the alities) abhijatasya, of one destined to have;-what kind of nature?-the daivim, divine; sampadam, nature-of one destined to have divine attributes, of one who is worthy of the excellence of the gods, i.e., of one who would be illustrations in future.
Thereafter, the demoniacal nature is now being stated:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that 'tejas' (vigour) is the ability to stand undefeated by the wicked. These twenty-six qualities represent the complete structure of 'daivi sampat' leading to liberation.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the first three verses list twenty-six divine qualities. Cultivating these qualities purifies the intellect and prepares the seeker for the realization of truth.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that 'naatimanita' (absence of pride) is the mark of a pure mind. Seeking honour from others is an obstacle to devotion and knowledge.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that these twenty-six virtues are aligned with the respective duties of different classes of society to ensure overall spiritual welfare.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that these qualities arise naturally in a devotee who relies on the grace of the Lord, making them completely fit for liberation.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the list of divine qualities is concluded here. Cultivating these virtues enables the seeker to overcome material tendencies and find the path of peace.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Austerity; cleanliness; nonviolence; truthfulness; absence of anger; renunciation; tranquility; aversion to faultfinding; compassion for all living entities; freedom from covetousness; gentleness; modesty; steady determination; vigor; forgiveness; fortitude; cleanliness; freedom from envy and the passion for honor—these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with divine nature.

 In the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this material world was explained. The extra roots coming out of it were compared to the activities of the living entities, some auspicious, some inauspicious. In the Ninth Chapter, also, the devas, or godly, and the asuras, the ungodly, or demons, were explained. Now, according to Vedic rites, activities in the mode of goodness are considered auspicious for progress on the path of liberation, and such activities are known as daivī prakṛti, transcendental by nature. Those who are situated in the transcendental nature make progress on the path of liberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion and ignorance, on the other hand, there is no possibility of liberation. Either they will have to remain in this material world as human beings, or they will descend among the species of animals or even lower life forms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord explains both the transcendental nature and its attendant qualities and the demoniac nature and its qualities. He also explains the advantages and disadvantages of these qualities. The word abhijātasya in reference to one born of transcendental qualities or godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child in a godly atmosphere is known in the Vedic scriptures as Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. If the parents want a child in the godly qualities they should follow the ten principles recommended for the social life of the human being. In Bhagavad-gītā we have studied also before that sex life for begetting a good child is Kṛṣṇa Himself. Sex life is not condemned, provided the process is used in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness at least should not beget children like cats and dogs but should beget them so that they may become Kṛṣṇa conscious after birth. That should be the advantage of children born of a father and mother absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The social institution known as varṇāśrama-dharma – the institution dividing society into four divisions of social life and four occupational divisions or castes – is not meant to divide human society according to birth. Such divisions are in terms of educational qualifications. They are to keep the society in a state of peace and prosperity. The qualities mentioned herein are explained as transcendental qualities meant for making a person progress in spiritual understanding so that he can get liberated from the material world. In the varṇāśrama institution the sannyāsī, or the person in the renounced order of life, is considered to be the head or the spiritual master of all the social statuses and orders. A brāhmaṇa is considered to be the spiritual master of the three other sections of a society, namely, the kṣatriyas, the vaiśyas and the śūdras, but a sannyāsī, who is on the top of the institution, is considered to be the spiritual master of the brāhmaṇas also. For a sannyāsī, the first qualification should be fearlessness. Because a sannyāsī has to be alone without any support or guarantee of support, he has simply to depend on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one thinks, “After I leave my connections, who will protect me?” he should not accept the renounced order of life. One must be fully convinced that Kṛṣṇa or the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His localized aspect as Paramātmā is always within, that He is seeing everything, and He always knows what one intends to do. One must thus have firm conviction that Kṛṣṇa as Paramātmā will take care of a soul surrendered to Him. “I shall never be alone,” one should think. “Even if I live in the darkest regions of a forest I shall be accompanied by Kṛṣṇa, and He will give me all protection.” That conviction is called abhayam, fearlessness. This state of mind is necessary for a person in the renounced order of life. Then he has to purify his existence. There are so many rules and regulations to be followed in the renounced order of life. Most important of all, a sannyāsī is strictly forbidden to have any intimate relationship with a woman. He is even forbidden to talk with a woman in a secluded place. Lord Caitanya was an ideal sannyāsī, and when He was at Purī His feminine devotees could not even come near to offer their respects. They were advised to bow down from a distant place. This is not a sign of hatred for women as a class, but it is a stricture imposed on the sannyāsī not to have close connections with women. One has to follow the rules and regulations of a particular status of life in order to purify his existence. For a sannyāsī, intimate relations with women and possession of wealth for sense gratification are strictly forbidden. The ideal sannyāsī was Lord Caitanya Himself, and we can learn from His life that He was very strict in regards to women. Although He is considered to be the most liberal incarnation of Godhead, accepting the most fallen conditioned souls, He strictly followed the rules and regulations of the sannyāsa order of life in connection with association with women. One of His personal associates, namely Choṭa Haridāsa, was associated with Lord Caitanya along with His other confidential personal associates, but somehow or other this Choṭa Haridāsa looked lustily on a young woman, and Lord Caitanya was so strict that He at once rejected him from the society of His personal associates. Lord Caitanya said, “For a sannyāsī or anyone who is aspiring to get out of the clutches of material nature and trying to elevate himself to the spiritual nature and go back home, back to Godhead, for him, looking toward material possessions and women for sense gratification – not even enjoying them, but just looking toward them with such a propensity – is so condemned that he had better commit suicide before experiencing such illicit desires.” So these are the processes for purification. The next item is jñāna-yoga-vyavasthiti: being engaged in the cultivation of knowledge. Sannyāsī life is meant for distributing knowledge to the householders and others who have forgotten their real life of spiritual advancement. A sannyāsī is supposed to beg from door to door for his livelihood, but this does not mean that he is a beggar. Humility is also one of the qualifications of a transcendentally situated person, and out of sheer humility the sannyāsī goes from door to door, not exactly for the purpose of begging, but to see the householders and awaken them to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the duty of a sannyāsī. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by his spiritual master, he should preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness with logic and understanding, and if one is not so advanced he should not accept the renounced order of life. But even if one has accepted the renounced order of life without sufficient knowledge, he should engage himself fully in hearing from a bona fide spiritual master to cultivate knowledge. A sannyāsī, or one in the renounced order of life, must be situated in fearlessness, sattva-saṁśuddhi (purity) and jñāna-yoga (knowledge). The next item is charity. Charity is meant for the householders. The householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spend fifty percent of their income to propagate Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. Thus a householder should give in charity to institutional societies that are engaged in that way. Charity should be given to the right receiver. There are different kinds of charity, as will be explained later on – charity in the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. Charity in the mode of goodness is recommended by the scriptures, but charity in the modes of passion and ignorance is not recommended, because it is simply a waste of money. Charity should be given only to propagate Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. That is charity in the mode of goodness. Then as far as dama (self-control) is concerned, it is not only meant for other orders of religious society, but is especially meant for the householder. Although he has a wife, a householder should not use his senses for sex life unnecessarily. There are restrictions for the householders even in sex life, which should only be engaged in for the propagation of children. If he does not require children, he should not enjoy sex life with his wife. Modern society enjoys sex life with contraceptive methods or more abominable methods to avoid the responsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental quality, but is demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to make progress in spiritual life, he must control his sex life and should not beget a child without the purpose of serving Kṛṣṇa. If he is able to beget children who will be in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can produce hundreds of children, but without this capacity one should not indulge only for sense pleasure. Sacrifice is another item to be performed by the householders, because sacrifices require a large amount of money. Those in other orders of life, namely brahmacarya, vānaprastha and sannyāsa, have no money; they live by begging. So performance of different types of sacrifice is meant for the householders. They should perform agni-hotra sacrifices as enjoined in the Vedic literature, but such sacrifices at the present moment are very expensive, and it is not possible for any householder to perform them. The best sacrifice recommended in this age is called saṅkīrtana-yajña. This saṅkīrtana-yajña, the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, is the best and most inexpensive sacrifice; everyone can adopt it and derive benefit. So these three items, namely charity, sense control and performance of sacrifice, are meant for the householder. Then svādhyāya, Vedic study, is meant for brahmacarya, or student life. Brahmacārīs should have no connection with women; they should live a life of celibacy and engage the mind in the study of Vedic literature for cultivation of spiritual knowledge. This is called svādhyāya. Tapas, or austerity, is especially meant for the retired life. One should not remain a householder throughout his whole life; he must always remember that there are four divisions of life – brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. So after gṛhastha, householder life, one should retire. If one lives for a hundred years, he should spend twenty-five years in student life, twenty-five in householder life, twenty-five in retired life and twenty-five in the renounced order of life. These are the regulations of the Vedic religious discipline. A man retired from household life must practice austerities of the body, mind and tongue. That is tapasya. The entire varṇāśrama-dharma society is meant for tapasya. Without tapasya, or austerity, no human being can get liberation. The theory that there is no need of austerity in life, that one can go on speculating and everything will be nice, is recommended neither in the Vedic literature nor in Bhagavad-gītā . Such theories are manufactured by show-bottle spiritualists who are trying to gather more followers. If there are restrictions, rules and regulations, people will not become attracted. Therefore those who want followers in the name of religion, just to have a show only, don’t restrict the lives of their students, nor their own lives. But that method is not approved by the Vedas. As far as the brahminical quality of simplicity is concerned, not only should a particular order of life follow this principle, but every member, be he in the brahmacārī āśrama, gṛhastha āśrama, vānaprastha āśrama or sannyāsa āśrama. One should be very simple and straightforward. Ahiṁsā means not arresting the progressive life of any living entity. One should not think that since the spirit spark is never killed even after the killing of the body there is no harm in killing animals for sense gratification. People are now addicted to eating animals, in spite of having an ample supply of grains, fruits and milk. There is no necessity for animal killing. This injunction is for everyone. When there is no alternative, one may kill an animal, but it should be offered in sacrifice. At any rate, when there is an ample food supply for humanity, persons who are desiring to make advancement in spiritual realization should not commit violence to animals. Real ahiṁsā means not checking anyone’s progressive life. The animals are also making progress in their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one category of animal life to another. If a particular animal is killed, then his progress is checked. If an animal is staying in a particular body for so many days or so many years and is untimely killed, then he has to come back again in that form of life to complete the remaining days in order to be promoted to another species of life. So their progress should not be checked simply to satisfy one’s palate. This is called ahiṁsā. Satyam. This word means that one should not distort the truth for some personal interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficult passages, but the meaning or the purpose should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master. That is the process for understanding the Vedas. Śruti means that one should hear from the authority. One should not construe some interpretation for his personal interest. There are so many commentaries on Bhagavad-gītā that misinterpret the original text. The real import of the word should be presented, and that should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master. Akrodha means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one should be tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomes polluted. Anger is a product of the mode of passion and lust, so one who is transcendentally situated should check himself from anger. Apaiśunam means that one should not find fault with others or correct them unnecessarily. Of course to call a thief a thief is not faultfinding, but to call an honest person a thief is very much offensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hrī means that one should be very modest and must not perform some act which is abominable. Acāpalam, determination, means that one should not be agitated or frustrated in some attempt. There may be failure in some attempt, but one should not be sorry for that; he should make progress with patience and determination. The word tejas used here is meant for the kṣatriyas. The kṣatriyas should always be very strong to be able to give protection to the weak. They should not pose themselves as nonviolent. If violence is required, they must exhibit it. But a person who is able to curb down his enemy may under certain conditions show forgiveness. He may excuse minor offenses. Śaucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one’s dealings also. It is especially meant for the mercantile people, who should not deal in the black market. Nāti-mānitā, not expecting honor, applies to the śūdras, the worker class, which are considered, according to Vedic injunctions, to be the lowest of the four classes. They should not be puffed up with unnecessary prestige or honor and should remain in their own status. It is the duty of the śūdras to offer respect to the higher class for the upkeep of the social order. All these twenty-six qualifications mentioned are transcendental qualities. They should be cultivated according to the different statuses of social and occupational order. The purport is that even though material conditions are miserable, if these qualities are developed by practice, by all classes of men, then gradually it is possible to rise to the highest platform of transcendental realization.