Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
āhārastvapi sarvasya trividho bhavati priyaḥ .
yajñastapastathā dānaṃ teṣāṃ bhedamimaṃ śṛṇu

Word Meanings:
आहारः - food
तु - indeed
अपि - also
सर्वस्य - of all
त्रिविधः - threefold
भवति - is
प्रियः - dear
यज्ञः - sacrifice
तपः - austerity
तथा - also
दानम् - charity
तेषाम् - their
भेदम् - distinction
इमम् - this
श्रृणु - hear.

Life Application:
Food liked by each is threefold, so also sacrifice, austerity, and charity; hear their distinctions.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The food also which is dear to each is threefold, as also sacrifice, austerity and almsgiving. Hear thou the distinction of these.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The food also which is dear to each is threefold, as also sacrifice, austerity and almsgiving. Hear thou the distinction of these.

आहारः food? तु indeed? अपि also? सर्वस्य of all? त्रिविधः threefold? भवति is? प्रियः dear? यज्ञः sacrifice? तपः austerity? तथा also? दानम् almsgiving? तेषाम् their? भेदम् distinction? इमम् this? श्रृणु hear.Commentary Each Every being that eats.Imam This That which is going to be described.Tesham Their Of food? etc.According to the Gunas? a mans taste for a particular food is determined. There are three kinds of food that a man can eat.All foods have different properties. Different foods exercise different effects on different compartments of the brain or the mind. A confection of sparrow? meat? fish? eggs? onion and garlic excites passion. Fruits? barley? etc.? render the mind calm and serene. The nature of food greatly influences the being of a man. Man feels a desire for particular foods according to his Guna or temperament.The body is the instrument by which man accomplishes all his purposes in the world. It is the horse that takes him to his destination or goal (Moksha). Therefore it should be kept clean? strong and healthy. The body is a mould prepared by the mind for its activities. There is an intimate connection between the body and the mind. The nature and condition of the body has a vital effect upon the mind and activities. Therefore the materials or foods that build the body and the mind should be pure? wholesome? nutritious? substantial and bland.Everything in this world is threefold. The food is either Sattvic? Rajasic or Tamasic according to its,character and effect upon the body and the mind. You can find out the nature or temperament of a man from the nature of the food he takes. You can find out your own nature? whether you are Sattvic? Rajasic or Tamasic? from your predilection to particular food and then abandon the Rajasic and the Tamasic foodstuffs and take to the Sattvic diet.Why is there also a triple division in sacrifice? austerity and charity Because this threefold division is according to the nature of the Gunas. You can find out and abandon the Rajasic and the Tamasic ones and take recourse exclusively to the Sattvic ones.The practice of Krichhra and Chandrayana Vratas that produce emaciation of the body and the senses is austerity. Tapas means meditation also. It produces Brahmatejas or divine splendour and glow on the face.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The food which men enjoy is also threefold, like the ways of sacrifice, austerity and almsgiving. Listen to the distinction.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In this verse, Lord Krishna introduces the topics of food, sacrifice, austerity, and charity, each of which is threefold. A person's inner nature is reflected in their daily habits—the food they prefer, their thoughts, and their actions. The purpose of analyzing these categories is self-purification. Purification of the heart involves abandoning the agitation of Rajas and the delusion of Tamas, and establishing the mind in the creative alertness of Sattva.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Further, the food also, which is dear to all, is of three kinds.  So are [their] sacrifice, austerity and charity.  Listen to this distinction of them.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Even the food which is dear to all is threefold. So are sacrifices, austeritty and gifts. Listen about this distinction among them.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Food also, which is dear to all, is of three kinds; and so also are sacrifices, austerity and charity. Listen to this classification of them.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the purpose of categorizing foods (into succulent, hot, and stale) and actions (sacrifices, charity, and penance) is to help seekers recognize the qualities (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas) within themselves so that they can reject Rajasic/Tamasic foods and actions, and embrace the Sattvic ones.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Food is also of three kinds dear to all, and similarly sacrifice, charity, and austerity are also of three kinds (meaning that there are three types of preferences in scriptural activities as well). Listen to this distinction of theirs.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that everyone must eat to maintain the body, whether they are believers or non-believers, and their inherent nature (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas) can be identified by the kind of food they prefer. This section does not merely describe food, but rather the preference of the eater. Similarly, their inclination toward scriptural acts of sacrifice, austerity, and charity shows their inner quality. A Sattvic person is drawn to Sattvic food and associations, a Rajasic to Rajasic, and a Tamasic to Tamasic and forbidden things.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Even the food which is dear to the host of all beings is of three kinds because of the association of the three Gunas consisting of Sattva etc. Similarly, sacrifices also are of three kinds. So too austerity and charity. Listen about this distinction, which is being described, about foods, sacrifices, austerities and gifts according to differences of Sattva etc.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.7–17.10 jointly): Sri Abhinavagupta explains that food is of three kinds according to Gunas, just like faith, sacrifice, penance, and charity. 'Yatayamam' refers to food for which three hours (one yama) have elapsed after cooking.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Aharah, food; api tu, also; which is priyah, dear; sarvasya, to all [Here Ast. adds praninah (creatures).-Tr.] who eat it; bhavati, is; trividhah, of three kinds; so also yajnah, sacrifices; similarly, tapah, austerity; tatha, so also; danam, charity. Srnu, listen; to imam, this; bhedam, classification; tesam, of them, of food etc., which is going to be stated.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that to elaborate on the differences of scriptural acts like sacrifices according to Gunas, the Lord first describes the three types of food, which are the root cause for the growth of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. Listen to their classification.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that not only is faith threefold, but the food dear to all is also of three kinds because everything in the world is composed of the three Gunas. Likewise, sacrifices, austerities (body and sense control), and charities are of three kinds. Listen to their classification according to Gunas.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that to show the division of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas in people, the Lord details the threefold divisions of food, sacrifice, penance, and charity. By knowing these, one should abandon Rajasic and Tamasic habits and adopt Sattvic ones to cultivate purity (Sattva).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that by understanding the Gunas through one's preference for certain foods, and recognizing the threefold division of sacrifices etc., a seeker must accept Sattvic foods and actions while rejecting Rajasic and Tamasic ones. Listen to this classification.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that food plays a crucial role in building the mind (as stated in the Upanishads: 'the mind consists of food'). A person's Guna determines their taste for food, which in turn strengthens that Guna. Similarly, sacrifices, penances, and charity are categorized according to Gunas. The Lord describes this so that seekers can reject Rajasic and Tamasic items and cultivate Sattva.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that after describing the differences in faith, the Lord explains Guna-based differences using food, sacrifice, penance, and charity. Food is dear to everyone in three distinct ways according to their nature. Hear the classification of these.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the threefold division of food, sacrifice, penance, and charity is taught so that seekers can adopt the Sattvic and reject the Rajasic and Tamasic versions. The divisions of faith and worship were already explained; now hear about food etc.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Even the food each person prefers is of three kinds, according to the three modes of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices, austerities and charity. Now hear of the distinctions between them.

 In terms of different situations in the modes of material nature, there are differences in the manner of eating and performing sacrifices, austerities and charities. They are not all conducted on the same level. Those who can understand analytically what kind of performances are in what modes of material nature are actually wise; those who consider all kinds of sacrifice or food or charity to be the same cannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There are missionary workers who advocate that one can do whatever he likes and attain perfection. But these foolish guides are not acting according to the direction of the scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the people in general.