Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
sakheti matvā prasabhaṃ yaduktaṃ he kṛṣṇa he yādava he sakheti .
ajānatā mahimānaṃ tavedaṃ mayā pramādātpraṇayena vāpi

Word Meanings:
सखा - friend
इति - as
मत्वा - regarding
प्रसभम् - presumptuously
यत् - whatever
उक्तम् - said
हे कृष्ण - O Krishna
हे यादव - O Yadava
हे सखा - O friend
इति - thus
अजानता - unknowing
महिमानम् - greatness
तव - Thy
इदम् - this
मया - by me
प्रमादात् - from carelessness
प्रणयेन - due to love
वा - or
अपि - even.No

Life Application:
Ask forgiveness for having casually addressed the Divine as a mere friend out of fondness or carelessness.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Lord! Thinking of You as a friend, and not knowing this greatness of Yours, whatever was said by me rashly, out of carelessness or even out of love, such as 'O Krishna! O Yadava! O Friend!'...

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Whatever I have presumptuously said from carelessness or love, addressing Thee as O Krishna! O Yadava! O Friend! regarding Thee merely as a friend, unknowing of this, Thy greatness.

सखा friend? इति as? मत्वा regarding? प्रसभम् presumptuously? यत् whatever? उक्तम् said? हे कृष्ण O Krishna? हे यादव O Yadava? हे सखा O friend? इति thus? अजानता unknowing? महिमानम् greatness? तव Thy? इदम् this? मया by me? प्रमादात् from carelessness? प्रणयेन due to love? वा or? अपि even.No Commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Whatever I have said unto Thee in rashness, taking Thee only for a friend and addressing Thee as O Krishna! O Yadava! O Friend!' in thoughtless familiarity, no understanding Thy greatness;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
See commentary under 11.42

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Taking You for a  [mere]  companion, not knowing this greatness of Yours,  and out of my carelessness or through even affection, whatever I have importunately called You as O Krsna,  O Yadava, O Comrade; and,

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Unaware of this majesty of Yours, and either from negligence or love, or considering You to be a friend, whatever I have rudely said as 'O Krsna, O Yadava, O Comrade.'

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Without knowing this greatness of Yours, whatever was said by me (to You) rashly, through inadvertence or even out of intimacy, thinking (You to be) a friend, addressing (You) as 'O krsna,' 'O Yadava,' 'O friend,' etc.-.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He begs forgiveness for the offense caused by ignorance, with the words beginning with 'yat'. He explains the meaning of the word 'idam' (this) as 'the Universal Form'. Since 'idam' (neuter) and 'mahimanam' (masculine) do not have grammatical agreement due to a change in gender, he says 'tava' (of Yours). Showing the possibility of grammatical agreement if there is an alternative reading, he says 'tava' etc. The connection of the words is: 'whatever I have said, for that I beg You to forgive me'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Not knowing Your majesty and true nature, and regarding You as 'my friend', whatever I have said rashly (without thinking) out of carelessness or love, addressing You as 'O Krishna! O Yadava! O Friend!'; and, O Achyuta! whatever disrespect was shown to You in jest, while walking, resting, sitting, or eating, whether alone or in the presence of those friends, relatives, etc.—for all of that, I beg forgiveness from You, who are of immeasurable nature.

Commentary—[When Arjuna is terrified on seeing the extremely fierce form of the Lord, he forgets the Krishna-form of the Lord and asks, 'Who are You, who have this fierce form?' But when he remembers Lord Krishna, that He is the very same, then on seeing the power etc. of the Lord, he recalls the past behaviour done out of friendly affection, and begs forgiveness from the Lord for that.]

'sakheti matva prasabham yaduktam he krsna he yadava he sakheti'—Great people, noble souls are not addressed directly by their names. For them, words like 'Aap' (You), 'Maharaj' (Sire), etc. are used. But I sometimes called You 'O Krishna!', sometimes 'O Yadava!' and sometimes 'O Friend!'. What was the reason for this? 'ajanata mahimanam tavedam' (Footnote p. 603.1) The reason was that I did not know such majesty and nature of Yours, that You are so extraordinary. That infinite millions of universes reside in a single part of Yours—this I did not know earlier. My sight never went towards Your power. I never even thought or understood who You are and what You are like.

Although Arjuna knew the nature, majesty, and power of the Lord even before—which is why, leaving aside an Akshauhini army, he had accepted the unarmed Lord—yet, that infinite millions of universes are situated in a single part of the Lord's body according to space—such power, nature, and majesty Arjuna had not known before. When the Lord gracefully showed the Cosmic Form, only after seeing it did Arjuna's sight go towards the Lord's power, and he began to know the Lord to some extent. He had this strange feeling: where am I, and where is the God of gods! Yet, due to carelessness or out of love, rashly, without thinking, whatever came to my mind, I said—'maya pramadadpranayena vapi'. In speaking, I did not exercise caution at all!

In reality, no one can ever fully know the majesty of the Lord; because the majesty of the Lord is infinite. If it is fully known, it will not remain infinite, it will become limited. When there is no end even to the glories arising from the power of the Lord, then how can there be an end to the Lord and His majesty? That is, it cannot be.

'yaccavahasarthamasatkrto'si viharasayyasnabhojanesu'—Thinking of You as an ordinary friend of equal status, whatever words of disrespect I said in jest, while walking on the way, sleeping or waking on the bed, sitting or rising on the seat, or eating food; or O Achyuta! when You were alone, or in front of those friends, relatives, and respectable persons etc. whatever dishonor I have done to You, for all that I beg forgiveness from You—'eko'thavapyacyuta tatsamaksa tatksamaye tvamahamaprameyam'.

There is such a description of the friendship between Arjuna and the Lord that just as two friends play together, so did Arjuna play with the Lord. Sometimes while bathing, Arjuna would throw water on the Lord with his hands and the Lord on Arjuna. Sometimes Arjuna would run after the Lord, and sometimes the Lord after Arjuna. Sometimes they both would laugh and make each other laugh. Sometimes they both would show their respective special arts to each other. Sometimes when the Lord would lie down to sleep, Arjuna would say, 'You have spread out so much to sleep, will no one else sleep? Are you the only one here?' Sometimes when the Lord sat on a seat, Arjuna would say, 'Will you sit alone on the seat? Will you let anyone else sit or not? You have established sole authority! Move aside a bit.' In this way, Arjuna used to behave very intimately with the Lord (Footnote p. 603.2). Now, remembering those things, Arjuna says, 'O Lord! I do not know how many times I have insulted You. I don't even remember all of them. Although You did not pay attention to my insults, yet many insults were committed by me, therefore, I beg forgiveness for all those insults from You, who are of immeasurable nature.' The purpose of calling the Lord 'aprameya' (immeasurable) is that even when blessed with divine vision, You do not come under the scope of divine vision.

Relationship—Now, in the next two verses, Arjuna describes the greatness and power of the Lord and prays again for forgiveness.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Infinite power, boundless valour, being the Inner Self of everything, being the creator etc., these constitute Your majesty. Being ignorant of this, and considering You only as a friend, and out of conseent love, or negligence born of life-long familiarity, whatever has been said rudely, without showing courtesy, such as 'O Krsna, O Yadava, O Comrade'; and whatever disrespect has been shown to You in jest, while playing or resting, while sitting or eating, while alone or in the sight of others - for all these I beseech forgiveness of You who are in incomprehensible.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Like a fool, ajanata, without knowing-. Not knowing what? In answer he says: idam, this; mahimanam, greatness-the Cosmic form; tava, of Yours, of God; yat, whatever; uktam, was said; maya, by me (to You); prasabham, rashly, slightingly; pramadat, through inadvertence, being in a distracted state of mind; va api, or even; pranayena, out of intimacy-itimacy is the familiarity arising out of love; whatever I have said because of that reason; erroneously matva, thinking (You); sakha iti, to be a friend, of the same age; iti, addressing You as, 'O Krsna,' 'O Yadava,' 'O friend,'-.
In the clause, 'tava idam mahimanam, ajanata, without knowing this greatness of Yours,' idam (this) (in the neutor gender) is connected with mahimanam (greatness) (in masculine gender) by a change of gender. If the reading be tava imam, then both the words would be in the same gender.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Seeing that supreme majesty of qualities such as imperishable lordship, he begs forgiveness with the words beginning with 'sakha'. The connection with the next verse is: 'Whatever has been said by me, who am completely ignorant of Your majesty, which is the splendor of extraordinary glory, addressing You as O Yadava, O Friend, for that I beg You to forgive me'.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Since I, due to ignorance of Your majesty, have committed countless offenses, therefore, bowing down to You, who are supremely compassionate, I beg forgiveness for my offenses; this he says in two verses beginning with 'sakheti'. Thinking 'You are my friend, of the same age', whatever was said by me rashly, that is, with an attitude of showing my own superiority, not knowing Your majesty, the supremacy of Your lordship. In the case of the masculine reading, it means 'not knowing this majesty of the nature of the Cosmic Form'. Either out of carelessness, which is distraction of the mind, or even out of love, which is affection. What was said? He says: 'O Krishna, O Yadava, O Friend'.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Now he begs forgiveness of the Lord in two verses beginning with 'sakha'. The connection with the following verse is: 'thinking of You as an ordinary friend, whatever was said rashly (with stubbornness/disrespect) by me, for all that I beg forgiveness of You'. What is that? 'O Krishna! O Yadava! O Friend!' (The sandhi in sakheti is an archaic Vedic usage). The reason for speaking rashly is: 'not knowing Your majesty and this Cosmic Form, whatever was said by me due to carelessness or even out of love (affection)'.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having thus praised, he begs forgiveness for his offense caused by ignorance. Thinking 'You are a friend of the same age', and out of a distorted understanding, whatever was said rashly, i.e., overbearingly or slightingly, like 'O Krishna, O Yadava, O Friend'. (The sandhi in sakheti is archaic). The connection is with the next verse: 'for that I beg You to forgive me'. Showing his suitability for forgiveness, he mentions that the offense was due to ignorance: 'not knowing Your majesty', i.e., glory, not knowing this Cosmic Form of the Lord, being ignorant and foolish. But in the reading 'imam', there is grammatical agreement with 'mahimanam'. He gives the reason for being ignorant of the manifested lordship: 'out of carelessness', i.e., due to a distracted mind, or even 'out of love', i.e., familiarity born of affection, whatever was said by me, this is the connection.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
With the intention of showing that the word 'mahiman' (majesty) qualified by the demonstrative pronoun 'idam' (this) refers to the majesty under discussion, he (Ramanuja) says: 'infinite power, boundless valour, etc.' If the word 'pramada' (carelessness) is interpreted as ignorance, it would lead to tautology with 'ajanata' (not knowing); therefore, taking it to mean the delusion of being of the same species/status, he explains it as 'from delusion' (mohat). Since the word 'pranaya' denotes love, and love is naturally the cause of friendly familiarity, he explains 'pranayena' as 'by long familiarity', showing that it refers to the familiarity arising from love. Since the realization of eternal friendship established by Shruti texts such as 'sayuja sakhaya...' cannot be born of delusion, he explains 'sakheti matva' (thinking as a friend) as referring to the worldly attitude of regarding Him as a contemporary, and thus says: 'thinking You to be my friend'. Showing that the words 'O Krishna' etc. represent the manner of rash speech, he indicates a lack of proper modesty and says 'O Krishna' etc. To establish the multiplicity of disrespect implied by the particle 'ca' (and) in 'yacca' (and whatever), he accepts a sentence-split by repeating the phrase 'yadasatkrtosi' and explains: 'whatever in jest', etc. Because of this alone, the multiplicity is expressed as 'all those' (tat sarvam). Bearing in mind that even disrespect shown in jest is an offense when directed towards a great soul, he explains the sense implied by the second-person verb as: 'You who are always worthy of respect'. The meaning resulting from the word 'ekah' (alone) is 'in private/alone'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Having thus bowed, he begs forgiveness for his offenses born of past ignorance in two verses beginning with 'sakha'. By me, not knowing this majesty of Yours as Purushottama, which is of the nature of the Cosmic Form, either due to carelessness, which is inattention, or even out of love, which is affection, whatever was said rashly, i.e., forcefully for engaging in inappropriate activities, such as addressing You by name as 'O Krishna' (instead of knowing You as the Supreme Being/Sat-svarupa), as 'O Yadava' due to Your birth in that clan (instead of knowing that You manifested for their liberation), and as 'O Friend' with a worldly attitude of friendship (instead of knowing You as the Supreme Self).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Having thus praised, he begs forgiveness for his offenses with the words beginning with 'sakheti'. Thinking 'He is my friend', whatever was said by me rashly, meaning with an attitude of displaying my own superiority, addressing You as 'O Krishna, O Yadava, O Friend'. (The sandhi here is archaic). Why was it said? 'not knowing this majesty of Yours of such a nature', sometimes due to carelessness, which is distraction of the mind, and sometimes due to love, which is affection.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Therefore, get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your enemies, you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by My arrangement, and you, O Savyasachin, can be but an instrument in the fight.

 Although Kṛṣṇa is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form, Arjuna remembers his friendly relationship with Kṛṣṇa and is therefore asking pardon and requesting Kṛṣṇa to excuse him for the many informal gestures which arise out of friendship. He is admitting that formerly he did not know that Kṛṣṇa could assume such a universal form, although Kṛṣṇa explained it as his intimate friend. Arjuna did not know how many times he may have dishonored Kṛṣṇa by addressing Him “O my friend,” “O Kṛṣṇa,” “O Yādava,” etc., without acknowledging His opulence. But Kṛṣṇa is so kind and merciful that in spite of such opulence He played with Arjuna as a friend. Such is the transcendental loving reciprocation between the devotee and the Lord. The relationship between the living entity and Kṛṣṇa is fixed eternally; it cannot be forgotten, as we can see from the behavior of Arjuna. Although Arjuna has seen the opulence in the universal form, he cannot forget his friendly relationship with Kṛṣṇa.