Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
kāmātmānaḥ svargaparā janmakarmaphalapradām .
kriyāviśeṣabahulāṃ bhogaiśvaryagatiṃ prati

Word Meanings:
कामात्मानः - full of desires
स्वर्गपराः - with heaven as their
जन्मकर्मफलप्रदाम् - leading to births as
क्रियाविशेषबहुलाम् - full of specific rites
भोगैश्वर्यगतिम् प्रति - aiming at enjoyment and power

Life Application:
Examine whether your actions are motivated by endless desire for material comfort or by genuine selflessness.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Full of desires, considering heaven alone as supreme, such people describe numerous rites leading to enjoyment and prosperity -- rites which (in truth) only yield the fruit of rebirth.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Full of desires, having heaven as their goal, (they utter speech which is directed to ends) leading to new births as the result of their works, and prescribe various methods abounding in specific actions, for the attainment of pleasure and power.

कामात्मानः full of desires? स्वर्गपराः with heaven as their highest goal? जन्मकर्मफलप्रदाम् leading to (new) births as the result of their works? क्रियाविशेषबहुलाम् exuberant with various specifi actions? भोगैश्वर्यगतिम् प्रति for the attainment of pleasure and lordship.No commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Consulting only their own desires, they construct their own heaven, devising arduous and complex rites to secure their own pleasure and their own power; and the only result is rebirth.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
No commentary. Those whose minds are captivated by that (flowery) speech, being attached to enjoyment and prosperity, do not develop a resolute intellect in their hearts; that is, they are not fit for the practice of meditation.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O son of  Prtha !  Those, whose very nature is desire,  whose goal is heaven,  who esteem only the Vedic declaration [of fruits],  who declare that there is nothing else,  who proclaim this flowery speech about the paths to the lordship of the objects of enjoyment-[the paths]  that are full of different actionsand who desire action alone as a fruit of their birth-they are men without insight.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
O! Partha, the unwise, who rejoice in the letter of the Vedas, say, 'There is nothing else.' They are full only of wordly desires and they hanker for heaven. They speak flowery words which offer rirth as the fruit of work. They look upon the Vedas as consisting entirely of varied rites for the attainment of pleasure and power. Those who cling so to pleasure and power are attracted by that speech (offering heavenly rewards) and are unable to develop the resolute will of a concentrated mind.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O son of Prtha, those undiscerning people who utter this flowery talk  which promises birth as a result of rites and duties, and is full of various special rites meant for the attainment of enjoyment and affluence , they remain engrossed in the utterances of the Vedas and declare that nothing else exists; their minds are full of desires and they have heaven as the goal.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Toward the attainment of enjoyment and lordship' means toward the attainment thereof. The sense is that they declare the Vedas to have that attainment alone as their fruit.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having described the unwise, the text further characterizes them by another qualification, to establish that a resolute intellect cannot arise for them. It qualifies the speech under discussion in order to show the cycle of worldly existence they undergo, hence 'birth.' Since a conscious being possessed of desire cannot itself be of the nature of desire, the text says 'devoted to desire' -- meaning engaged only in the actions that are means to their various desired fruits, and thus turned away from the knowledge preceded by renunciation of action. Nor do even those devoted to action turn toward the knowledge that is the means to liberation, out of regard for the supreme human goal; hence they are further called 'devoted to heaven,' meaning attached solely to heaven, certain that there is no human goal beyond it. Lest it be doubted that the word 'birth' -- referring to bodies high, middling and low -- really produces the stated result, the text shows this comes about through specific rites, hence 'rites.' The specific rites, suited to particular occasions, persons and durations -- such as those spanning seven days or several days -- are said to abound plentifully in that speech. To clarify how such rites abound in that speech, it further specifies this through the word 'heaven,' as something to be revealed. And though rites might seem capable of serving as a means to liberation, this possibility is denied to those devoted to them, by the word 'enjoyment.' Finally, the outcome for those who utter such speech is shown by the phrase 'abounding in that.'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O son of Pritha! Those who are absorbed in desires, who regard heaven alone as supreme, who delight in the fruitive rites prescribed in the Vedas, and who say that there is nothing beyond sense-enjoyment -- such unwise people utter this kind of flowery (showy but hollow) speech, which grants the fruit of action in the form of rebirth and which describes many rites for the attainment of enjoyment and lordship.

Explanation -- 'Kamatmanah': they are so immersed in desires that they themselves become identified with desire; they see no difference between themselves and their desires, believing that without desire one cannot live or act, and that without desire a person becomes as lifeless as a stone. Such people are 'kamatmanah.' In truth the self remains ever the same without increase or decrease, while desire comes and goes and waxes and wanes; the self is a part of God, while desire belongs to the world -- so the two are entirely distinct, though people absorbed in desire fail to recognize their own true nature separately.
'Svargaparah' -- since the finest of divine pleasures are found in heaven, heaven becomes their highest goal, and they remain occupied day and night in attaining it; this refers to those who place their faith in the heavenly worlds described in the Vedas and scriptures.
'Vedavadaratah... nanyad astiti vadinah' -- they delight in the fruitive rites of the Vedas, taking the purport of the Vedas to be only enjoyment and the attainment of heaven; hence they are 'vedavadaratah.' In their view there is nothing beyond enjoyments here and in heaven -- no God, no true knowledge, no liberation, no divine love -- so they remain absorbed only in enjoyment, which becomes their chief aim.
'Yam imam pushpitam vacham pravadanty avipashcitah' -- those unwise people who lack discernment between the real and unreal, the eternal and non-eternal, utter this flowery speech of the Vedas that describes the world and its enjoyments.
'Pushpitam' indicates that such speech, describing the attainment of enjoyment and lordship, is only flower and foliage, not fruit; satisfaction comes from fruit, not from the beauty of flowers -- such speech does not grant a lasting result, and the heavenly enjoyment it promises, though beautiful to behold, is not permanent.
'Janmakarmaphalapradam' -- that flowery speech grants the fruit of action in the form of rebirth, because it gives importance only to worldly enjoyments, and attachment to those enjoyments becomes the very cause of future birth (cf. Gita 13.21).
'Kriyavisheshabahulam bhogaishvaryagatim prati' -- that showy speech, in describing the fruitive rites for attaining enjoyment and lordship, abounds in numerous procedures -- many kinds of methods, many kinds of actions, many kinds of articles required, and much physical exertion involved (cf. Gita 18.24).

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The ignorant, whose knowledge is little, and who have as their sole aim the attainment of enjoyment and power, speak the flowery language i.e., having its flowers (show) only as fruits, which look apparently beautiful at first sight. They rejoice in the letter of the Vedas i.e., they are attached to heaven and such other results (promised in the Karma-kanda of the Vedas). They say that there is nothing else, owing to their intense attachment to these results. They say that there is no fruit superior to heaven etc. They are full of worldly desires and their minds are highly attached to secular desires. They hanker for heaven, i.e. think of the enjoyment of the felicities of heaven, after which one can again have rirth which offers again the opportunity to perform varied rites devoid of true knowledge and leads towards the attainment of enjoyments and power once again.

With regard to those who cling to pleasure and power and whose understanding is contaminated by that flowery speech relating to pleasure and lordly powers, the aforesaid mental disposition characterised by resolution, will not arise in their Samadhi. Samadhi here means the mind. The knowledge of the self will not arise in such minds. In the minds of these persons, there cannot arise the mental disposition that looks on all Vedic rituals as means for liberation based on the determined conviction about the real form of the self. Hence, in an aspirant for liberation, there should be no attachment to rituals out of the conviction that they are meant for the acisition of objects of desire only.

It may be estioned why the Vedas, which have more of love for Jivas than thousands of parents, and which are endeavouring to save the Jivas, should prescribe in this way rites whose fruits are infinitesimal and which produce only new births. It can also be asked if it is proper to abandon what is given in the Vedas. Sri Krsna replies to these estions.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 2.42–2.44 jointly): Yam imam etc., upto na vidhiyate.  Those, who crave for objects of desire, speak, on their own  accord, of  this flowery Vedic speech which is pervaded by the fruits i.e., the heaven in the future; and who, hence, desire the action itself as the fruit of their birth - these are men without insight.  further, having their mind carried away by the same Vedic sentence imagined by themselves, these persons, eventhough they are endowed with the determinate knowledge, are not fit for concentration, because they do not decide this (concentration) as a fruit [of their action].  This is the purport of the traid of these verses.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Partha, O son of Prtha; those devoid of one-pointed conviction, who pravadanti, utter; imam, this; yam puspitam vacam, flowery talk, which is going to be stated, which is beautiful like a tree in bloom, pleasant to hear, and appears to be (meaningful) sentences [Sentences that can be called really meaningful are only those that reveal the self.-Tr.];  who are they? they are  avipascitah, people who are undiscerning, of poor intellect, i.e. non-discriminating; veda-vada-ratah, who remain engrossed in the utterances of the Vedas, in the Vedic sentences which reveal many panegyrics, fruits of action and their means; and vadinah, who declare, are apt tosay; iti, that; na anyat, nothing else [God, Liberation, etc.]; asti, exists, apart from the rites and duties conducive to such results as attainment of heaven etc.
And they are kamatmanah, have their minds full of desires, i.e. they are swayed by desires, they are, by nature, full of desires; (and) svarga-parah, have heaven as the goal. Those who accept heaven (svarga) as the supreme (para) human goal, to whom heaven is the highest, are svarga-parah. They utter that speech ( this is supplied to construct the sentence ) which janma-karma-phala-pradam, promises birth as a result of rites and duties. The result (phala) of rites and duties (karma) is karma-phala. Birth (janma) itself is the karma-phala. That (speech) which promises this is janma-karma-phala-prada. (This speech) is kriya-visesa-bahulam, full of various special rites; bhoga-aisvarya-gatim-prati, for the attainment of enjoyment and affluence. Special (visesa) rites (kriya) are kriya-visesah. The speech that is full (bahula) of these, the speech by which that is full (bahula) of these, the speech by which these, viz objects such as heaven, animals and sons, are revealed plentifully, is kriya-visesa-bahula. Bhoga, enjoyment, and aisvarya, affluence, are bhoga-aisvarya. Their attainment (gatih) is bhoga-aisvarya-gatih. (They utter a speech) that is full of the specialized rites, prati, meant for that (attainment). The fools who utter that speech move in the cycle of transmigration. This is the idea.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Lest the word 'gati' also be understood in the sense of 'loss,' [the commentator] says 'enjoyment' -- otherwise it would amount to a pointless restatement. To explain how this too constitutes a censure, he says 'with regard to its attainment,' meaning that such a person does not regard liberation as the fruit of the Veda.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
What kind of people are these unwise ones? Those ignorant of the true purport of the Vedic pronouncements. 'Kamatmanah' means those whose very self desires enjoyment and lordship; 'svargaparah' means those for whom the heavenly world alone is the supreme fruit to be attained. What kind of speech do they utter? One that grants the fruit of birth through action -- or this qualifier may instead apply to 'gati' (attainment). The construction is: they utter speech abounding in specific rites, which grants the fruit of birth through action.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
If it be asked why a resolute intellect does not arise even in those who are not resolute, since the source of knowledge (the Veda) is the same for all, the answer is that it does not arise because of an obstruction, explained through these three verses. Those whose minds are carried away by this flowery speech -- well known from its use in the injunctions of Vedic study, apparently charming like a flowering but fruitless tree, since it reveals only a means-end relation without any supreme, lasting fruit -- such unwise people do not develop a resolute intellect. Why does it lack a supreme fruit? Because it grants only the fruit of action in the form of birth: birth meaning connection with a new body and senses, action arising from birth as governed by one's caste and stage of life, and fruit arising from action such as sons, cattle and heaven -- all perishable, granted repeatedly like a water-wheel without interruption. Hence, toward the attainment of enjoyment and lordship, it abounds in specific rites -- fire sacrifices and the like meant for pleasures such as drinking nectar and dallying with celestial nymphs, or for lordship such as dominion over gods -- because the ritual portion of the Veda is notoriously far more extensive than its knowledge portion. Such people utter this Veda in the form of the ritual portion, accepting its promised fruits, such as heaven, as the highest goal, because they are unwise, lacking discernment born of reflection on its true purport. Hence they delight in the eulogistic passages of the Veda, wrongly believing them literally true and content with that belief. O son of Pritha, they consequently declare that there is nothing beyond the ritual portion, since all of the Veda is meant for enjoining action, and there is no fruit of knowledge higher than the fruit of action -- thus speaking against the intent of the knowledge portion. They do so because they hate liberation, being full of desire, their minds crowded with hundreds of desired objects; and so, being devoted to heaven above all -- heaven possessing charms like the nymph Urvashi -- and wandering under the delusion that there is no human goal beyond heaven, lacking discrimination and dispassion, they are unable even to bear talk of liberation. Their minds, absorbed in the enjoyment and lordship already mentioned, being unaware of the defects such as impermanence, and thus firmly fixed, have their discriminative knowledge carried away and covered by that speech abounding in specific rites. For such people, though the well-known validity of the Veda -- whose eulogistic passages serve merely to praise, in matters not otherwise contradicted -- cannot be grasped, no resolute intellect arises in their meditative mind, or with regard to the object of such meditation.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Hence 'kamatmanah' -- those whose minds are agitated by desire; therefore those for whom heaven alone is the supreme human goal. It grants birth, along with the actions to be performed in that birth and their fruits. The construction is: they utter that speech which abounds in the specific rites serving as means to the attainment of enjoyment and lordship.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Since their inmost mind is fixed on desire, and hence heaven alone is their supreme human goal, that speech grants the fruit of action, namely birth itself. Through Vedic speech one is engaged in action, and through action birth is obtained; the Vedic speech itself does not independently bestow birth and the rest -- with this in mind, the teacher (Shankara) did not explain it as granting birth, and the action within that birth, and its fruit, [as three separate things]. The construction is: they utter that speech which abounds in the specific rites serving as means to the attainment of enjoyment and lordship.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
If it be asked what purpose their speaking thus serves, the answer is given by 'kamatmanah' -- those whose nature is pervaded by desire. If it be further asked why they pursue such a trifling fruit out of desire, the answer is 'svargaparah' -- those for whom heaven alone, as if it were liberation itself, is supreme. To convey that heaven is understood in that manner, the preceding speech is qualified as 'janmakarmaphalapradam' -- granting birth in a superior womb, together with superior action therein and its superior fruit, bestowing these abundantly; and thus, toward the attainment of enjoyment and lordship, they speak of that fruit-bearing speech which abounds in specific rites.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Toward the attainment of enjoyment and lordship' means for that very purpose. 'Kamatmanah' -- minds seized by desire; hence 'svargaparah' -- devoted to heaven. What kind of attainment of enjoyment and lordship? One that grants birth as the fruit of action. A person who has attained enjoyment and lordship, driven by the residual impressions thereof, takes birth again for the sake of attaining enjoyment and lordship, performs actions toward that end, and thereby obtains enjoyment as the fruit -- so the wheel turns ceaselessly, and by this he falls away from steadfastness. Moreover, 'abounding in specific rites' means that the more the expenditure of wealth, effort and the like increases, the more the attainment of enjoyment and lordship likewise increases. By this it is said that people become attached even to actions achieved only through great effort, out of greed for their fruit. The commentary explains that the specific rites -- such as the Agnihotra -- which serve as means to the attainment of enjoyment and lordship abound in that speech, which grants the fruit of action, namely birth.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Being desirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this.

 People in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance they are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in the karma-kāṇḍa portions of the Vedas. They do not want anything more than sense gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wine and women are available and material opulence is very common. In the Vedas many sacrifices are recommended for elevation to the heavenly planets, especially the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifices. In fact, it is stated that anyone desiring elevation to heavenly planets must perform these sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of knowledge think that this is the whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very difficult for such inexperienced persons to be situated in the determined action of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous trees without knowing the results of such attractions, unenlightened men are similarly attracted by such heavenly opulence and the sense enjoyment thereof. In the karma-kāṇḍa section of the Vedas it is said, apāma somam amṛtā abhūma and akṣayyaṁ ha vai cāturmāsya-yājinaḥ sukṛtaṁ bhavati. In other words, those who perform the four-month penances become eligible to drink the soma-rasa beverages to become immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth some are very eager to have soma-rasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sense gratifications. Such persons have no faith in liberation from material bondage, and they are very much attached to the pompous ceremonies of Vedic sacrifices. They are generally sensual, and they do not want anything other than the heavenly pleasures of life. It is understood that there are gardens called Nandana-kānana in which there is good opportunity for association with angelic, beautiful women and having a profuse supply of soma-rasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainly sensual; therefore there are those who are purely attached to such material, temporary happiness, as lords of the material world.