Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
adeśakāle yaddānamapātrebhyaśca dīyate .
asatkṛtamavajñātaṃ tattāmasamudāhṛtam

Word Meanings:
अदेशकाले - at a wrong place
यत् - which
दानम् - charity
अपात्रेभ्यः - to unworthy persons
च - and
दीयते - is given
असत्कृतम् - without respect
अवज्ञातम् - with insult
तत् - that
तामसम् - Tamasic
उदाहृतम् - is declared to be.

Life Application:
Charity given at wrong place/time, to unworthy persons, without respect or with insult—is Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The gift that is given at a wrong place and time, to unworthy persons, without respect or with contempt, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The gift that is given at a wrong place and time, to unworthy persons, without respect or with insult is declared to be Tamasic.

अदेशकाले at a wrong place and time? यत् which? दानम् gift? अपात्रेभ्यः to unworthy persons? च and? दीयते is given? असत्कृतम् without respect? अवज्ञातम् with insult? तत् that? तामसम् Tamasic? उदाहृतम् is declared to be.Commentary Adesakale At a wrong place and time At a place which is not holy? where irreligious people congregate and where beggars assemble? where wealth acired through illegal means such as gambling? theft? etc.? is distributed to gamblers? singers? fools? rogues? women of evil reputation and at a time which is not auspicious. But? this does not discourage giving alms or other charity to the poor and the needy. In their case these restrictions do not apply.Without respect? etc. Without pleasant speech? without the washing of feet or without worship? although the gift is made at a proper time and place.The donor does not give in good faith although he gets a worthy recipient. He never bends his head in worship. He does not offer him a seat. He treats him with contempt or disrespect.Lord Krishna says to Arjuna I have described that faith? charity? austerity? food? etc.? are invariably coloured by the three alities. There was no desire on My part to refer to the lower ones but to distinguish the highest purity it was necessary to point out the mark of the other two. When the two are set aside? the third is more clearly appreciated in the same way as if day and night are removed the twilight is seen better. Even so be avoiding passion and darkness? the third? viz.? purity or Sattva becomes vividly clear and purity which is the best can be easily realised. Thus in order to show thee the real nature of purity? I have described the other two? so that laying them aside? and resorting to the highest thou mayest attain the goal? viz.? Moksha.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
And that which is given at an unsuitable place or time or to one who is unworthy, or with disrespect or contempt - such a gift is the result of Ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The gift that is given at an improper place and time, to unworthy persons (apatrebhyashcha), or given without respect (asatkrtam) and with contempt (avajnatam), is declared as Tamasic. Even if place and time are correct, if the donor demeans the recipient, the charity becomes Tamasic.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The gift which is given, at a wrong place, at a wrong time and to unworthy persons; and which is converted into a bad act and is disrespected - that  is declared to be of the Tamas.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That gift which is given at the wrong place and wrong time to unworthy recipients, without due respect and with contempt, is called the gift of Tamasa nature.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The gift which is made at an improper place and time, and to undeserving persons, without proper treatment and with disdain, is declared to be born of tamas.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that Tamasic charity is given in unholy places (like lands of barbarians), at unholy times (when no merit is produced), to unworthy people (like fools or thieves), or given without proper washing of feet, welcoming words, or with active contempt and insult to the recipient.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The gift that is given at a wrong place and time, to unworthy persons, without respect or with contempt, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that Tamasic charity lacks discrimination. It is given in unholy places, at unholy times (such as during periods of impurity), and to unworthy persons (apatra - fools, thieves, or those who use the gift for gambling/drinking). Even if given to a worthy person, if it is given without respect (asatkrtam - no sweet words or honor) or with contempt (avajnatam - insulting the recipient), it is classified as Tamasic. Supporting sinful actions also falls under this.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
That gift which is given to unworthy recipients at wrong place and time, without due respect, viz., without showing such signs of respect as cleansing the feet; with contempt, viz., with disdain and without courtesy - that is said to be of Tamasa nature.

 So far, the divisions due to differences of Gunas in respect of sacrifices, austerities and gifts as enjoined by the Vedas have been portrayed. Now is given the definition of Vedic sacrifices etc., according to their association with Pranava (i.e., the syllable Om), and as signified by the terms Tat and Sat.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Datavyam etc. upto udahrtam.  With the thought that  'One must give' :  thinking that the [scriptural] injunction  'One must give' is to be obeyed in order to avoid sin.  Very much vexed : because of the fault of [giving] very little. A gift is converted into a bad one by offending its recipient, and so on.  Thus the activities of the worldly men are explained on the basis of their three-fold intentions born of the Sattva and so on.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tat, that; danam, gift; yat, which; diyate, is given; adesakale, at an improper place and time-in an unholy place full of barbarians and impure things, etc.; at an improper time: which is not well known as productive of merit; without such specially as Sankranti etc.-; and apatrhyah, to undeserving persons, to fools, thieves and others;-and even when the place etc. are proper-asatkrtam, without proper treatment, without sweet words, washing of feet, worship, etc.; and avajnatam, with disdain, with insults to the recipient; is udahrtam, declared to be; tamasam, born of tamas.
This advice is being imparted for making sacrifices, gifts, austerities, etc. perfect:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that Tamasic charity is given in unholy places associated with sin or bad association, at unholy times not well known for merit, to unworthy recipients (like dancers or prostitutes), or given without respect (sweet speech, foot-washing) or with open contempt and insult of the recipient.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that Tamasic charity is given in unholy places, at unholy times, to unworthy recipients (like actors or dancers), or even when place and time are correct, given without respect (foot-washing, etc.) or with contempt.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that Tamasic charity is given in unholy places (impure or associated with barbarians), at unholy times, to unworthy recipients (like thieves or fools), or given without proper treatment (sweet words, worship) or with insult to the recipient.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that wrong places are those inhabited by barbarians; wrong times are nights, etc. Unworthy recipients are fools, thieves, gamblers, etc. Lack of respect (asatkrtam) is shown by not washing feet, and contempt (avajnatam) is shown by using insulting words.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that Tamasic charity is given in unholy places (like lands of barbarians), at unholy times, or to unworthy people like prostitutes or dancers. Even if given to worthy people, if it is given without proper welcome or with disdain, it is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'asatkrtam' means given without sweet speech, foot-washing, and other forms of respect. 'Avajnatam' means with active insult to the recipient.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
And charity performed at an impure place, at an improper time, to unworthy persons, or without proper attention and respect is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

 Contributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not encouraged here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance. Such charity is not beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged. Similarly, if a person gives charity to a suitable person but without respect and without attention, that sort of charity is also said to be in the mode of darkness.