Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
mayi cānanyayogena bhaktiravyabhicāriṇī .
viviktadeśasevitvamaratirjanasaṃsadi

Word Meanings:
मयि - in Me
च - and
अनन्ययोगेन - by unswerving yoga of devotion
भक्तिः - devotion
अव्यभिचारिणी - unswerving
विविक्तदेशसेवित्वम् - resort to solitary places
अरतिः - distaste
जनसंसदि - in the assembly of worldly men

Life Application:
Offer unswerving devotion to God, resort to quiet places, and avoid unhealthy crowds and meaningless chatter.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Unadulterated devotion in Me through Ananyayoga; Nature of living in a solitary place and disinterest in the community of (uncultured) people.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Unswerving devotion unto Me by the Yoga of non-separation, resort to solitary places, distaste for the society of men.

मयि in Me? च and? अनन्ययोगेन by the Yoga of nonseparation? भक्तिः devotion? अव्यभिचारिणी unswerving? विविक्तदेशसेवित्वम् resort to solitary places? अरतिः distaste? जनसंसदि in the society of men.Commentary The man of wisdom is firmly convinced that there is nothing higher than Me and that I am the sole refuge. He has unflinching devotion to Me through Yoga without any thought,for other objects. His mind has merged or entered into Me. Just as a river? when it merges itself in the ocean becomes completely one with it? even so he? being united with Me? worships only Me. This is Ananya Yoga or Aprithak Samadhi (Yoga of nonseparation or the superconscious state in which the devotee feels that he is nondistinct from God). Such devotion is a means of attaining knowledge. Such a devotee will never give up his devotion and worship even when he is under great trials and adversities.Viviktadesasevitvam He lives on the banks of sacred rivers? in caves? in the mountains? on the shores of seas or lakes and in beautiful solitary gardens where there is no fear of serpents? tigers or thieves. In solitary places the mind is ite calm. There are no disturbing elements that can distract ones attention. You can have uninterrupted meditation on the Self and can enter into Samadhi ickly.Society of men Distaste for the society of worldlyminded people? not of the wise? pure and holy. Satsanga or association with the wise is a means to the attainment of the knowledge of the Self.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Unswerving devotion to Me, by concentration on Me and Me alone, a love for solitude, indifference to social life;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Possibly due to Arjun's active nature or due to Lord Krishna being a social reformer? whatever? The form in which Bhagavad Gita is available to us? It is a very practical scripture on the subject of self-realization. Whenever Geetacharya advises his disciple to develop any particular mental or intellectual quality, he immediately also tells the practical and practical way to achieve it. If a seeker develops the qualities mentioned in the previous three verses in himself? So he can definitely accumulate a lot of power in his internal and external life behavior. This verse tells how he should utilize this extra power in the right direction. So that one can benefit from it in self-development. Due to Ananya Yoga, unadulterated devotion in me means concentration of the mind on the objective subject. For this, it is necessary to practice completely renouncing the extraneous tendencies and maintaining only the goal-oriented attitude. There can be two reasons for the loss of this stability in meditation or devotion, either the instability of the mind of the seeker or the aim itself not being fixed unless both of these are stable? Devotion or meditation cannot be successful. If our devotion keeps changing from one idol to another, then how can concentration be possible? It is said here that for progress and development in Yoga, devotion to God through exclusive Yoga is necessary. Here it is said about the stability of the goal. With undivided attention and enthusiasm in the mind, concentration in devotion becomes an easy task. Otherwise, the mind itself may rebel and keep wandering in self-conceived false attractions. The symbolic sentence used by the Lord regarding the wandering of the mind in very low and disgusting matters during meditation shows how harshly He wants to condemn this wandering of the mind. He says that there should be unadulterated devotion in the tradition of a seeker. Adultery means selling one's abilities and beauty for some paltry gain. Only the mind absorbed in God can be concentrated in meditation. Here, with the word 'Avyabyacharya', the seeker is warned that his attention should not get distracted by various deities or thoughts. Rather, remain united with the chosen goal. Is this type of well-organized life and stability of meditation possible then? When the seeker lives in an environment favorable to him. This is shown by these two qualities (a) Indulgence in solitude? And? (b) Disinterest in the public. The more a man's mind becomes pure and free from pleasures? His curiosity for knowledge increases more and more. It is natural that then to quench his thirst for knowledge, he goes away from the community of people to where knowledge is available. This thing poet? Author? This is also true about scientists etc. All of them then see only one goal and they have no interest in worldly things. Is the community which has been asked to be disinterested here uncultured? Uncultured? What has been said about the community of people addicted to pleasures? Not with the company of saintly men. Satsang is a seeker of knowledge and not a hindrance. Solitary confinement? And no person who is disinterested in the public should understand the opposite meaning that here it has been said to flee from the world or to hate the society.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
And an unfailing devotion towards Me, with the Yoga of non-difference; resorting to solitary place; distaste for a crowd of people;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Constant devotion directed to Me alone, resort to solitary places and dislike for crowds:

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And unwavering devotion to Me with single-minded concentration; inclination to repair into a clean place; lack of delight in a crowd of people;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Mayiti.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He says of another means: something. The words self and others are not self-meaning, their subject is knowledge, discrimination, their eternity, and their fidelity there? For he who is devoted to discrimination is capable of knowing the meaning of the sentence. Their cultivation of emotions is the realization of the unity of knowledge of the truth as the cause of the attainment of these with effort. Doubting why the criticism of that fruit, he says: Tattva. Therefore, since there is instinct, the vision of the meaning of knowledge of the truth is meaningful, the remainder. He concludes by saying that the inner cause of knowledge is this. Doubting whether it is knowable, he says, "To avoid it. The reason for this is that it is the world. Because its instinct, its origin, is its cause, it is to be abandoned, and when it is known, it is to be abandoned, that is, it is known by it. The word iti means the end of the right to accomplish.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Through Ananyayoga, I have the devotion to remain unadulterated, the nature of living in a solitary place and not having love in the public.

Explanation - Mayi Chananyayogen Bhaktirvyabhicharini - Due to taking shelter in the world, the seeker remains conscious of his body. This body consciousness is the main obstacle in the knowledge of the unmanifested. To overcome this, God is telling the means of performing unadulterated devotion to Himself through Ananyayoga, keeping the objective of Tatvgyaan here. It means that one can easily get rid of body pride even through the means of devotion. There should be no desire to get anything from anyone other than God, i.e. man other than God? Teacher? God? Can the scriptures etc. make me experience that element and on my own strength? Intelligence? By ability I will attain that element - in this way any thing? There should be no support from any person and only by the grace of God I will experience that principle - thus having only God's support - this is to be ananyayoga in God. Your relationship should be only with God? Not to have even the slightest relation with anyone else - this is to have unadulterated devotion towards God. It means that the means (means) of attaining Tatva should also be God and the means (means) should also be God - this is to have unadulterated devotion towards God through Ananyayoga. The seeker who has the sanskars of devotion along with knowledge? This tool is very useful for him. If a devotee devotee takes refuge in God alone with the aim of philosophy? So only through this means one can attain philosophy. God has also talked about unadulterated devotion among the ways to transcend the qualities (Gita 14. 26). Doubt - Here the attainment of philosophical knowledge through devotion has been said and in the fifty-fourth and fifty-fifth verses of the Eighteenth Chapter, it has been said that the attainment of devotion is through knowledge? Why is this so? Solution - As there are two types of devotion - devotion to the means and devotion to the end. Similarly, there are two types of knowledge – instrumental knowledge and practical knowledge. Sadhyabhakti and Sadhyagyan - both are essentially the same. Sadhyabhakti and Sadhyagyan - both of these are the means to attain Sadhyabhakti or Sadhyagyan. So, where is it said about attaining Tatvgyan (Sadhyagyan) through devotion? That is also correct and where is it said about attaining supreme devotion (sadhyabhakti) through knowledge? That's fine too. Therefore, what should the seeker do? Knowledge or devotion - which sanskar has priority? Use the means accordingly. Be careful only that the aim is only for God? Not nature or its actions. Having such an aim, he attains God through the same means. Doubt - Why did God mention His devotion in the means of knowledge? Does the seeker of Gyan Yoga also do devotion to God? Solution - There are two types of seekers (seekers) of Gyan Yoga - emotion-oriented (bhakti-oriented) and discretion-oriented (knowledge-oriented). (1) He is an emotion-oriented seeker? Who wants to know the essence by taking shelter of God (Gita 7. 16 13. 18). In the second verse of the same chapter, Maam? Mmm? In the third stanza? The occurrence of the words mayi in this (tenth) verse and madbhaktaḥ and madbhavaaya in the eighteenth verse prove that till the eighteenth verse it is a matter of emotional curiosity. But from the nineteenth to the thirty-fourth stanza, the word 'Asmad' (I speaker) has not been used even once? Therefore there is a case of a rational inquirer. Therefore, here, due to the context of emotional curiosity, the means of devotion have been described under the means of knowledge. Second thing? For example, is ghee or milk required for sattvik food? So there ghee and milk together with sattvik food also confirm it and alone also confirm it. Similarly, devotion to God, combined with the means of knowledge, helps in attaining God and even alone makes one transcendental (Gita 14. 26). Even in Patanjala Yoga Darshan, the means of Ashtangayoga for attaining God have been said to be the rule of devotion i.e. devotion to God as an auxiliary (Commentary P. 684.1) and the same devotion has also been said to be independent (Commentary P. 684.2). This proves that the means of devotion has a distinct specialty of its own. Due to this characteristic also, devotion has been described among the means of knowledge. (2) He is a wise seeker? The one who contemplates on the truth and untruth and wants to know the essence with intense dispassion for discrimination (Gita 13. 19 - 34). If we think about it, nowadays due to the lack of spiritual curiosity and abundance of sensual pleasures, we see very few discriminating seekers. The means of devotion are very useful for such seekers. Therefore, it seems logical to describe devotion here. Remedy - Considering only God as your own and taking refuge in God and chanting the name of God with faith? Kirtan? Contemplation? Remembrance etc. is the easy way of devotion. Viviktadeshsevitvam - Should I think about God while living in solitude? Should I remember the hymns? Should I self-study the good scriptures? Should I go deeper and understand that element? May there not be any hindrance in my activities and my resources? No one should live with me and I should not live with anyone - the name of such a natural desire of a seeker is 'Vivittva'. The meaning of this is that the seeker should be interested in living alone? But if such solitude is not found then there should not be the slightest disorder in the mind. This thought should be in his mind that what about the company of the world? The coincidence is automatically getting separated and the inconsistency in form is self-evident. The company of the world in this self-evident inconsistency? coincidence? There can never be a relationship. Therefore, the company of the world can never be a hindrance. Just going to a deserted forest etc and lying alone and assuming that I am in a lonely place is actually a mistake because this body, which is the seed of the entire world, is with me. As long as there is a relationship with this body? Till then the relationship with the entire world remains intact. So, what is the benefit of going to a secluded place? When the main objective is to destroy body consciousness. That is real solitude? In which nothing other than one element was produced? Neither is nor will be. Which has no senses? There is no life? There is neither mind nor conscience. Which has no physical body? There is neither a subtle body nor a causal body. In which there is neither an individual body nor a holistic world. In which there is only one element, that is, there is nothing else except one element. The reason is that apart from the one Supreme Being, there was nothing before and there will be nothing in the end also. Whatever seems to be in between? That too is being visible only through Pratiti, i.e. through whom the world is being visible? Those senses, conscience etc. are also perceptions themselves. Therefore, perception is happening only through perception. Our (form) relationship has never been with the body and the soul because the body and the soul are the work of nature and the form is always beyond nature. To experience this way is actually to be separated from the separated country. Aartirjanasansadi - Love in the community of ordinary humans? Not interested means where and what is happening? What will happen when? How will it be if there is no desire to listen to worldly things etc. and meet people who tell news? Get some news - even the slightest desire? There is no love. But does anyone want to ask us about some principle? Want to discuss the tool? The desire in your mind to meet him? He is not a member of Parliament. Just like this, where there is talk of principle? Do we have the idea of ​​element among ourselves or is there anyone who knows the divine element in our view? What is the interest in the company of such men? That is not called interest in the masses? Actually that is necessary. It has also been said - Sangah Sarvatmana Tyajyah Sa Chettyuktam Na Shakyate.   Sa Sadbhi Saha Dutvaah Satan Sango Hi Bheshajam. That is, one should not associate with anyone with attachment, but if there is no such inconsistency? So one should associate with great men. Because the company of great men is the antidote to inconsistency.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Constant devotion' means devotion with a single end, namely, Myself the Lord of all; 'remaining in places free from people' means having no love for crowds of people.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.8–13.12 jointly): Amanitvam etc.  upto anyatha.  [Devotion] with me Yoga of non-difference etc. :  a conviction, 'There exists nothing else different from the Mighty Lord, the Supreme Soul,' - a conviction, which allows no difference and is itself a Yoga, i.e. a devotion in the form of this conviction.  Hence this never fails.  For, either the desires that are considered to be causes for failure are absent, or those desires which are of the form of mind-modifications,  are completely absorbed in Him alone.  The above may be borne in mind in all [other] cases too.  What is opposed to this is  [conducive to]  wrong  knowledge :  such as pride and others.
 That which is to be known by this knowledge is described  [as] -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Ca, and; avyabhicarini, unwavering-not having any tendency to deviate; bhaktih, devotion; mayi, to Me, to God; ananya-yogena, with single-minded concentration, with undivided concentration-ananyayogah is the decisive, unswerving conviction of this kind: 'There is none superior to Lord Vasudeva, and hence He alone is our Goal'; adoration with that. That too is Knowledge.
Vivikta-desa-sevitvam, inclination to repair into a clean place-a place (desa) naturally free (vivikta) or made free from impurity etc. and snakes, tigers, etc.; or, place made solitary (vivikta) by being situated in a forest, on a bank of a river, or in a temple; one who is inclined to seek such a place is vivikta-desa-sevi, and the abstract form of that is vivikta-desa-sevitvam. Since the mind becomes calm in places that are indeed pure (or solitary), therefore meditation on the Self etc. occurs in pure (or solitary) places. Hence the inclination to retire into clean (or solitary) places is called Knowledge.
Aratih, lack of delight, not being happy; jana-samadi, in crowd of people-an assemblage, a multitude of people without culture, lacking in purity and immodest-, (but) not (so) in a gathering of pure and modest persons since that is conducive to Knowledge. Hence, lack of delight in an assembly of common people is Knowledge since it leads to Knowledge.
Besides,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Mayiti.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
and in me. By exclusive yoga, unchanging and uncaused devotion is said to be in the form of the heart in the middle.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Mayiti. Moreover, devotion to Me and to Lord Vasudeva, the Supreme Lord, is love preceded by knowledge of the supreme excellence. By exclusive yoga there is no other than Lord Vasudeva, and therefore He is our destination, thus certainly invariable and cannot be prevented by any adverse reason. That too, love, which is the cause of knowledge, is not liberated in Me, Vasudeva, by the Yoga of the body, for it is said. A place that is secluded, pure by nature or by rituals, free from impurities such as snakes, tigers and others, and pleasing to the mind, such as the beaches of the tune of the gods, is to be accustomed to serving it. And so, in the same pure place as the Sruti, devoid of sugar, fire, sand, by sound, water, shelter, etc. It should be used in a cave air shelter, not in a mentally pleasing manner. In the assembly of people who are averse to self-knowledge, who preach sense gratification and greed, they are attracted to the knowledge of the truth, which is contrary to their passion. For the saints, however, it is appropriate to have a passion for the assembly, which is conducive to knowledge of the truth. And so it is said, if attachment is despised by the whole soul, it cannot be said. That should be done with the saintly, for association with the saintly is the cure.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Kinch -- and in me. Uncompromising solitary devotion from the viewpoint of the whole self by exclusive yoga in Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead? What is the essence of the feeling of a man who has the character to serve that country in solitude, purity of mind and grace? There is a sense of delight in the assembly of ordinary people in parliament

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
But by exclusive yoga in Me, the Supreme Lord, there is no one other than Lord Vasudeva, and therefore He is our destination. And that is knowledge because it is the means of the intermediate stage of knowledge. I give them the Yoga of intelligence by which they attain Me. The Yoga of devotion to Lord Vasudeva is applied. Knowledge which quickly causes detachment is said to be causeless. Secluded by nature or by rituals, forbidden by unclean things, snakes, tigers, etc., and served in places like forests, rivers, banks, temples, etc., is the sense of being a secluded country-servant. Because it is accomplished in secluded places, which are the causes of the gratification of the mind by feeling the secluded self, therefore, serving a secluded place is knowledge because it is the means of knowledge. Similarly, the scriptures are equal to Shuu, devoid of sugar, fire, sand, sound, water, reservoirs, etc. It should be used in the mind, not in the oppression of the eyes, in the shelter of the cave air. There is a combination of ordinary people, greedy for sensual pleasures, impudent, time-blinded minds, in the assembly, not in the assembly of the disciplined, humble, philosophers. Because it is useful for knowledge. And thus it cannot be said that the attachment mentioned is wholly insignificant. That is to be done with the saints, for the saints are the language of association.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
By eradicating other devotion in Me, he gives the definition of the form used for non-deviation: In Me is the Lord of all. And therefore invariance is the root of that stability? Otherwise, with the intention of repetition, he says that he is steady by the yoga of solitude. Not to deviate from her character, that is, she is deviant. For the purpose of avoiding the contradiction of meditation, etc., he is separated, like the serpent, afraid of the crowd, etc. And it is said by the Dharma of Moksha that such a Brahmin has wealth as unity, equality and truth. Truth, patience (position in virtue), the treasure of punishment, simplicity, and then the cessation of actions [M.Bh. The people here are other than the Sattva.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
And again, by exclusive yoga in Me, by taking refuge in Me in the worldly and temporal, devotion without deviation from good intelligence elsewhere? To be a secluded country servant, to be a servant of that country without the Lord’s circumstances? Arati in the assembly of the people, in the assembly of worldly beings with birth and other troubles, Arati is the desire for establishment and other things.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The verse mayiti is clear.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Unalloyed devotion unto Me, resorting to solitary places, detachment from the general mass of people, resolute in understanding the object of philosophical knowledge;

 This process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less intelligent men as being the interaction of the field of activity. But actually this is the real process of knowledge. If one accepts this process, then the possibility of approaching the Absolute Truth exists. This is not the interaction of the twenty-four elements, as described before. This is actually the means to get out of the entanglement of those elements. The embodied soul is entrapped by the body, which is a casing made of the twenty-four elements, and the process of knowledge as described here is the means to get out of it. Of all the descriptions of the process of knowledge, the most important point is described in the first line of the eleventh verse. Mayi cānanya-yogena bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī: the process of knowledge terminates in unalloyed devotional service to the Lord. So if one does not approach, or is not able to approach, the transcendental service of the Lord, then the other nineteen items are of no particular value. But if one takes to devotional service in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the other nineteen items automatically develop within him. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.12) , yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ. All the good qualities of knowledge develop in one who has attained the stage of devotional service. The principle of accepting a spiritual master, as mentioned in the eighth verse, is essential. Even for one who takes to devotional service, it is most important. Transcendental life begins when one accepts a bona fide spiritual master. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, clearly states here that this process of knowledge is the actual path. Anything speculated beyond this is nonsense. As for the knowledge outlined here, the items may be analyzed as follows. Humility means that one should not be anxious to have the satisfaction of being honored by others. The material conception of life makes us very eager to receive honor from others, but from the point of view of a man in perfect knowledge – who knows that he is not this body – anything, honor or dishonor, pertaining to this body is useless. One should not be hankering after this material deception. People are very anxious to be famous for their religion, and consequently sometimes it is found that without understanding the principles of religion one enters into some group which is not actually following religious principles and then wants to advertise himself as a religious mentor. As for actual advancement in spiritual science, one should have a test to see how far he is progressing. He can judge by these items. Nonviolence is generally taken to mean not killing or destroying the body, but actually nonviolence means not to put others into distress. People in general are trapped by ignorance in the material concept of life, and they perpetually suffer material pains. So unless one elevates people to spiritual knowledge, one is practicing violence. One should try his best to distribute real knowledge to the people, so that they may become enlightened and leave this material entanglement. That is nonviolence. Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult and dishonor from others. If one is engaged in the advancement of spiritual knowledge, there will be so many insults and much dishonor from others. This is expected because material nature is so constituted. Even a boy like Prahlāda, who, only five years old, was engaged in the cultivation of spiritual knowledge, was endangered when his father became antagonistic to his devotion. The father tried to kill him in so many ways, but Prahlāda tolerated him. So there may be many impediments to making advancement in spiritual knowledge, but we should be tolerant and continue our progress with determination. Simplicity means that without diplomacy one should be so straightforward that he can disclose the real truth even to an enemy. As for acceptance of the spiritual master, that is essential, because without the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master one cannot progress in the spiritual science. One should approach the spiritual master with all humility and offer him all services so that he will be pleased to bestow his blessings upon the disciple. Because a bona fide spiritual master is a representative of Kṛṣṇa, if he bestows any blessings upon his disciple, that will make the disciple immediately advanced without the disciple’s following the regulative principles. Or, the regulative principles will be easier for one who has served the spiritual master without reservation. Cleanliness is essential for making advancement in spiritual life. There are two kinds of cleanliness: external and internal. External cleanliness means taking a bath, but for internal cleanliness one has to think of Kṛṣṇa always and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. This process cleans the accumulated dust of past karma from the mind. Steadiness means that one should be very determined to make progress in spiritual life. Without such determination, one cannot make tangible progress. And self-control means that one should not accept anything which is detrimental to the path of spiritual progress. One should become accustomed to this and reject anything which is against the path of spiritual progress. This is real renunciation. The senses are so strong that they are always anxious to have sense gratification. One should not cater to these demands, which are not necessary. The senses should only be gratified to keep the body fit so that one can discharge his duty in advancing in spiritual life. The most important and uncontrollable sense is the tongue. If one can control the tongue, then there is every possibility of controlling the other senses. The function of the tongue is to taste and to vibrate. Therefore, by systematic regulation, the tongue should always be engaged in tasting the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Kṛṣṇa and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. As far as the eyes are concerned, they should not be allowed to see anything but the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa. That will control the eyes. Similarly, the ears should be engaged in hearing about Kṛṣṇa and the nose in smelling the flowers offered to Kṛṣṇa. This is the process of devotional service, and it is understood here that Bhagavad-gītā is simply expounding the science of devotional service. Devotional service is the main and sole objective. Unintelligent commentators on the Bhagavad-gītā try to divert the mind of the reader to other subjects, but there is no other subject in Bhagavad-gītā than devotional service. False ego means accepting this body as oneself. When one understands that he is not his body and is spirit soul, he comes to his real ego. Ego is there. False ego is condemned, but not real ego. In the Vedic literature ( Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.10) it is said, ahaṁ brahmāsmi: I am Brahman, I am spirit. This “I am,” the sense of self, also exists in the liberated stage of self-realization. This sense of “I am” is ego, but when the sense of “I am” is applied to this false body it is false ego. When the sense of self is applied to reality, that is real ego. There are some philosophers who say we should give up our ego, but we cannot give up our ego, because ego means identity. We ought, of course, to give up the false identification with the body. One should try to understand the distress of accepting birth, death, old age and disease. There are descriptions in various Vedic literatures of birth. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the world of the unborn, the child’s stay in the womb of the mother, its suffering, etc., are all very graphically described. It should be thoroughly understood that birth is distressful. Because we forget how much distress we have suffered within the womb of the mother, we do not make any solution to the repetition of birth and death. Similarly at the time of death there are all kinds of sufferings, and they are also mentioned in the authoritative scriptures. These should be discussed. And as far as disease and old age are concerned, everyone gets practical experience. No one wants to be diseased, and no one wants to become old, but there is no avoiding these. Unless we have a pessimistic view of this material life, considering the distresses of birth, death, old age and disease, there is no impetus for our making advancement in spiritual life. As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant that one should have no feeling for these. They are natural objects of affection. But when they are not favorable to spiritual progress, then one should not be attached to them. The best process for making the home pleasant is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one is in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he can make his home very happy, because this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very easy. One need only chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Kṛṣṇa, have some discussion on books like Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , and engage oneself in Deity worship. These four things will make one happy. One should train the members of his family in this way. The family members can sit down morning and evening and chant together Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. If one can mold his family life in this way to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness, following these four principles, then there is no need to change from family life to renounced life. But if it is not congenial, not favorable for spiritual advancement, then family life should be abandoned. One must sacrifice everything to realize or serve Kṛṣṇa, just as Arjuna did. Arjuna did not want to kill his family members, but when he understood that these family members were impediments to his Kṛṣṇa realization, he accepted the instruction of Kṛṣṇa and fought and killed them. In all cases, one should be detached from the happiness and distress of family life, because in this world one can never be fully happy or fully miserable. Happiness and distress are concomitant factors of material life. One should learn to tolerate, as advised in Bhagavad-gītā . One can never restrict the coming and going of happiness and distress, so one should be detached from the materialistic way of life and be automatically equipoised in both cases. Generally, when we get something desirable we are very happy, and when we get something undesirable we are distressed. But if we are actually in the spiritual position these things will not agitate us. To reach that stage, we have to practice unbreakable devotional service. Devotional service to Kṛṣṇa without deviation means engaging oneself in the nine processes of devotional service – chanting, hearing, worshiping, offering respect, etc. – as described in the last verse of the Ninth Chapter. That process should be followed. Naturally, when one is adapted to the spiritual way of life, he will not want to mix with materialistic men. That would go against his grain. One may test himself by seeing how far he is inclined to live in a solitary place, without unwanted association. Naturally a devotee has no taste for unnecessary sporting or cinema-going or enjoying some social function, because he understands that these are simply a waste of time. There are many research scholars and philosophers who study sex life or some other subject, but according to Bhagavad-gītā such research work and philosophical speculation have no value. That is more or less nonsensical. According to Bhagavad-gītā , one should make research, by philosophical discretion, into the nature of the soul. One should make research to understand the self. That is recommended here. As far as self-realization is concerned, it is clearly stated here that bhakti-yoga is especially practical. As soon as there is a question of devotion, one must consider the relationship between the Supersoul and the individual soul. The individual soul and the Supersoul cannot be one, at least not in the bhakti conception, the devotional conception of life. This service of the individual soul to the Supreme Soul is eternal, nityam, as it is clearly stated. So bhakti, or devotional service, is eternal. One should be established in that philosophical conviction. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11) this is explained. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam. “Those who are actually knowers of the Absolute Truth know that the Self is realized in three different phases, as Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān.” Bhagavān is the last word in the realization of the Absolute Truth; therefore one should reach up to that platform of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus engage in the devotional service of the Lord. That is the perfection of knowledge. Beginning from practicing humility up to the point of realization of the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, this process is just like a staircase beginning from the ground floor and going up to the top floor. Now on this staircase there are so many people who have reached the first floor, the second or the third floor, etc., but unless one reaches the top floor, which is the understanding of Kṛṣṇa, he is at a lower stage of knowledge. If anyone wants to compete with God and at the same time make advancement in spiritual knowledge, he will be frustrated. It is clearly stated that without humility, understanding is not truly possible. To think oneself God is most puffed up. Although the living entity is always being kicked by the stringent laws of material nature, he still thinks, “I am God” because of ignorance. The beginning of knowledge, therefore, is amānitva, humility. One should be humble and know that he is subordinate to the Supreme Lord. Due to rebellion against the Supreme Lord, one becomes subordinate to material nature. One must know and be convinced of this truth.