Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
kṣetrakṣetrajñayorevamantaraṃ jñānacakṣuṣā .
bhūtaprakṛtimokṣaṃ ca ye viduryānti te param

Word Meanings:
क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोः - between the Kshetra and
एवम् - thus
अन्तरम् - distinction
ज्ञानचक्षुषा - by the eye of spiritual wisdom
भूतप्रकृतिमोक्षम् - liberation of beings from material nature
च - and
ये - who
विदुः - know
यान्ति - go
ते - they
परम् - the Supreme.

Life Application:
Those who perceive with the eye of wisdom the distinction between field and knower, and liberation from nature, reach Supreme.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Thus, those who know through the eye of wisdom the distinction between the field and the knower of the field, and liberation from the modifications of Prakriti, attain the Supreme Brahman.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
They who, by the eye of knowledge, perceive the distinction between the field and its knower and also the liberation from the Nature of being, go to the Supreme.

क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोः between the Kshetra and the Kshetrajna? एवम् thus? अन्तरम् distinction? ज्ञानचक्षुषा by the eye of knowledge? भूतप्रकृतिमोक्षम् the liberation from the Prakriti of being? च and? ये who? विदुः know? यान्ति go? ते they? परम् the Supreme.Commentary They who know through the eye of intuition opened by meditation and the instructions of the spiritual preceptor and the scriptures? that the field is insentient? the doer? changing and finite? and that the knower of the field (the Self) is pure consciousness? the nondoer? unchanging and infinite? and who also perceive the nonexistence of Nature? ignorance? the Unmanifested? the material cause of being -- they attain the Supreme. Through the attainment of Selfrealisation or knowledge of the Self? they are entirely liberated from the clutches or the influence of Maya (delusion) and ignorance. They do not assume any more bodies. They are not born again. They attain Kaivalya Moksha.In accordance with the doctrine of the Sankhyas? bondage and freedom do not pertain to the Self because It is always unattached and it is the nondoer and nonenjoyer and also without limbs or parts. But on account of Its union with Nature? It assumes agency through superimposition. When ignorance is annihilated through the knowledge of the Self? Nature which is conjoined with the Self is liberated. Then She gives up Her play or dance in front of the Spirit. She has discharged all Her duties well for the sake of the enjoyment and the release (Bhoga and Apavarga) of the Purusha (Spirit). Therefore the Sankhyas declare that bondage and freedom are states of Nature only. Some interpret that the Self is emancipated from the shackles of Nature and Her modifications.(This chapter is known by the name PrakritiPurushaVibhagaYoga also.)Thus in the Upanishads of the glorious Bhagavad Gita? the science of the Eternal? the scripture of Yoga? the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna? ends the thirteenth discourse entitledThe Yoga of the Distinction BetweenThe Field and the Knower of the Field.    ,

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Those who with the eyes of wisdom thus see the difference between Matter and Spirit, and know how to liberate Life from the Law of Nature, they attain the Supreme."

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Since the Self is the illuminator of all, It is not affected by the attributes of the illuminated. After describing this principle, Lord Sri Krishna here says that the ultimate goal of human life is to realize one's supreme Self by knowing the nature, function, and relationship of the Kshetra and Kshetrajna. This goal of life can be achieved only by that seeker who is equipped with the means of discrimination and the virtues of the heart specified in this chapter. Only such a seeker can directly experience his one and only non-dual Sachchidananda Brahman nature. The means of experiencing the Self is called intuition, which is referred to as the eye of knowledge (Jnana-chakshu) in Hindu scriptures. Those who, established in the Supreme Self, have recognized the absolute non-existence of Prakriti (Kshetra, Unmanifest, ignorance) are the fully enlightened wise men. Prakriti is perceived only due to ignorance; in reality, Brahman alone is the ultimate truth.

Conclusion:
OM TAT SAT. Thus in the Upanishads of the glorious Bhagavad Gita, the science of the Eternal, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, ends the thirteenth discourse entitled 'The Yoga of the Distinction Between the Field and the Knower of the Field.'

This is an extremely bright chapter of the Gita, which teaches us the direct means of meditating on our eternally pure, conscious, and liberated Self-nature, through the practice of which we can obtain direct realization. Waking up from a dream means the end of all the miseries of the dream state. No definite boundary has been set for the transition between the waking, dreaming, and deep sleep states—that is, we do not have to put in any effort for the transition of states. Similarly, our worldly suffering is only due to our false identification with Prakriti born of ignorance. Therefore, Self-realization attained through the discrimination between the Kshetra and Kshetrajna leads to the cessation of the world (samsara). This is the only knowable thing. In the entire Gita, we do not find a clearer and more direct instruction of the Supreme Self in any other chapter.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Those who thus understand, with the knowledge-eye, the inner Soul of the Field and the Field-sensitizer and also the deliverance from the Material Cause of the elements-they attain the Supreme.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Those who thus discern with the eye of knowledge the difference between the body or the Field (Ksetra) and the knower of the body or Field-knower (Ksetrajna), and the means of deliverance from the manifested Prakrti - they attain the Supreme.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Those who know thus through the eye of wisdom the distinction between the field and the Knower of the field, and the annihilation of the Matrix of beings,-they reach the Supreme.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The means of deliverance from the elements (body) and Prakriti (material nature) is the practice of values beginning with humility (amanitvam) etc. [13.8].

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He concludes the chapter's meaning along with its fruit. Those who, through the eye of wisdom (the direct realization of the Self born of the instructions of scriptures and teachers), understand the distinction—the mutual difference characterized by immutability, changeability, etc.—between the Field (Kshetra) and the Knower of the Field (Kshetrajna) as explained before, and also know the liberation, i.e., the dissolution, of the Prakriti of beings, which is of the nature of ignorance and called the Unmanifest, by means of the supreme knowledge of the Self—they reach the Supreme, the absolute reality, Brahman; meaning they do not take up another body. Thus, in this thirteenth chapter, by defining humility (amanitvam) etc., and by stating that one who is established in these and possesses the true knowledge of Kshetra and Kshetrajna achieves the complete human goal with the cessation of all miseries, the identity of the terms 'Tat' (That) and 'Tvam' (Thou) is established. I bow to that Supreme Self, the non-dual Krishna, who is Shankara, by whom the true nature of Kshetra and Kshetrajna has been well revealed. Thus ends the thirteenth chapter in the Sri Gita-bhashyotkarsha-dipika composed by the learned Dhanpati, the son of Ramakumar, the descendant of Datta family, and disciple of Sri Balaswami Sripada.

The means of deliverance from the elements and Prakriti is humility etc. [13.8].

He concludes the entire meaning of the chapter—'kṣetra...'. Those who, through the eye of knowledge born of the teachings of scriptures, teachers, and self-experience, know the difference and distinction between the previously mentioned Kshetra and Kshetrajna, caused by their being insentient and sentient, doer and non-doer, changing and unchanging respectively, attain the Supreme, i.e., liberation. Fearing that, like the Sankhyas, we might also claim liberation merely from the knowledge of the distinction between Purusha and the attributes, he says: 'bhūtaprakṛtimokṣam'. Those who know the liberation, i.e., the complete annihilation, through knowledge, of the Prakriti of beings, which is the material cause of space etc., and is three-fold ignorance, they alone reach the Supreme, and not those who merely know the distinction between Kshetra and Kshetrajna. If Prakriti were one, true, and all-pervading, then even for many liberated souls who are unattached seers, its perception would be unavoidable, leading to their bondage. If it is false, then from the perspective of the one who has attained Self-realization, it is completely negated like a snake in a rope and does not exist in all three periods of time, while for others it exists as beginningless and endless. Therefore, liberation does not come from mere knowledge of the distinction between Prakriti and Purusha, but from the knowledge of Purusha through the sublation of Prakriti, just as the fear of a snake is removed by seeing the rope, resulting in freedom from bondage. This is established.

He concludes the chapter's meaning—'kṣetra...'. Those who know the difference and distinction between Kshetra and Kshetrajna through the eye of discrimination, and also know the liberation from the Prakriti of beings, and the means of liberation such as meditation—they reach the supreme state.

Now the fruit of the knowledge of what is to be avoided, what is to be accepted, and the means thereto, which is the main subject of this chapter, is stated: 'kṣetra...'. He explains the word 'evam': in the manner described, i.e., in terms of being ignorant and knowing, being supported and supporter, being subordinate and principal, etc. The word 'antaram' means distinction. In 'jnana-caksusa', the word 'jnana' is used to exclude divine vision etc., and indicates the knowledge acquired from the instruction. Knowledge is called a 'chaxu' (eye) because it causes subsequent direct perception. By this, discrimination is made; the differentiating aspect here is: the liberation from the Prakriti made of elements, or the liberation of beings from Prakriti. As for Shankara's interpretation: 'the Prakriti of beings is of the nature of ignorance, called the Unmanifest, and its liberation means its dissolution', that should be set aside as it contradicts scriptures like 'the beginningless and endless cow...'. Since the fruit of the knowledge of the individual soul is intended here, the word 'param' refers to the purified individual soul. Its supremacy is with respect to its own previous state of worldly existence; hence he says: 'liberated from bondage'. At the beginning of the chapter, Kshetra and Kshetrajna were explained, and indirectly, the group of qualities like humility etc., as the means to attain the purified self; therefore, in this conclusion too, the liberation from Prakriti, mentioned along with Kshetra and Kshetrajna, must refer to that very group of qualities. Hence he says: 'that by which one is liberated'. The word 'mokṣa' is formed in the sense of instrument. Explaining the aspect to be known among the stated, and showing that the mere knowledge of the meaning of the sentences is not the direct cause of liberation but requires practice, and indicating the removal of undesirable things by the term 'bhuta-prakriti-moksha', and the attainment of the desired by 'param yati', he states the unified meaning of the great sentence: 'kṣetra...' Thus in the works of Vedanta-charya Venkatanatha, the lion of poets and logicians, independent in all systems...

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Thus, those who know through the eye of wisdom the distinction (division) between the Field and the Knower of the Field, and also know themselves as separate from Prakriti along with its cause and effect, attain the Supreme.

Commentary: [The path of knowledge begins with discrimination (viveka) and ends in true realization (bodha). Upon attaining true realization, there is a complete cessation of relationship with Prakriti, and the self-established Supreme Divine is realized—this is what is stated here.]

'kṣetrakṣetrajñayorevamantaraṃ jñānacakṣuṣā' — Knowing the Sat and Asat (existence and non-existence), the eternal and temporary, the Field and the Knower of the Field as distinct is called the 'eye of knowledge' (discrimination). This Field is mutable; it never remains the same. It changes every moment. There is not a single moment when it remains static. But the Knower of the Field who dwells in this Field, who knows it, always remains the same. No change has ever occurred, will occur, or is even possible in the Knower of the Field. Knowing and experiencing this is knowing the division between the Field and the Knower of the Field through the eye of knowledge.

'bhūtaprakṛtimokṣaṃ ca ye viduryānti te param' — Upon attaining true discrimination or realization, one's relationship is severed from the elements and Prakriti, i.e., from the entire effects of Prakriti, as well as from Prakriti itself. On the complete severance of connection with Prakriti, i.e., on having the clear experience of one's separation from Prakriti, seekers attain the Supreme Reality.

Previously, the Lord stated that those who worship the Unmanifest attain Him—'te prāpnuvanti mām eva' (12.4). The same point has been expressed in the 18th verse of this chapter by the words 'mad-bhāvāyopapadyate', in the 23rd verse by 'na sa bhūyo 'bhijāyate', and here by 'yānti te param'.

In the path of knowledge, identification with the body is the main obstacle. To remove this obstacle, the Lord said at the beginning of this chapter 'idaṃ śarīram' (this body) to exhort Arjuna to experience the separation of the self (Knower of the Field) from the body (Field). In the second verse, by the words 'kṣetrajñaṃ cāpi māṃ viddhi', He called the knowledge of the Field and the Knower of the Field as true knowledge. Then He described the separation of the Field and the Knower of the Field in several ways. Now, concluding the same topic at the end, the Lord says that by knowing the separation between the Field and the Knower of the Field correctly, one's connection with the Field is completely severed.

It is the Knower of the Field (individual soul) who, turning away from the Supreme, assumed separation from Him, and turning towards the Field, assumed oneness with it. Therefore, both points—oneness with the Supreme and complete separation from the Field—became necessary to state. Thus, the Lord showed the Knower's oneness with the Supreme in the second verse of this chapter by 'kṣetrajñaṃ cāpi māṃ viddhi', and here He is showing the Field's oneness with the collective world. The purpose of both is to show the non-difference between the Knower of the Field (soul) and the Supreme.

For example, if a house is completely dark, and someone says that ghosts live in the house, a fear/superstition of ghosts arises in it. But when a courageous man enters the house with a light, both the darkness and the ghost vanish. Walking in the dark, a person moves slowly lest he should trip or fall into a pit. He is also afraid of scorpions, snakes, thieves, etc. But as soon as there is light, all these fears vanish. Similarly, by turning away from the all-pervading, self-luminous Supreme Lord, the independent existence of the dark world is seen everywhere, and various kinds of fears torment. But when true realization occurs, the independent existence of the world does not remain, and all fears disappear. The self-luminous Supreme Lord alone remains. To remove darkness, light has to be brought; but the Supreme Lord does not have to be brought from anywhere. He is eternally present as He is, in all space, time, object, person, and circumstance. Therefore, on complete severance of relation with the world, His realization happens on its own.

Thus, with the pronunciation of the divine names Tat, Sat, in the Upanishad of the glorious Bhagavad Gita, the science of the Eternal, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, ends the thirteenth discourse entitled 'The Yoga of the Distinction Between the Field and the Knower of the Field.'

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Those who 'discern thus' in the described manner the 'difference', namely, the difference between the body and the knower of the body with 'the eye of knowledge' or discrimination, and also the 'means of deliverance from manifested Prakrti' - they attain the 'highest', namely, the self. They are completely delivered from bondage. Moksa is that by which deliverance is effected. The means of deliverance as already stated consists of alities beginning with modesty (13.7). They, through the knowledge already imparted concerning the differences between the body and the self, know those differences existing between them. Then learning about modesty etc., which form the means of deliverance from Prakrti that has devleoped into material elements constituting the body, they have to practise these virtues, and they will thery be absolutely delivered from bondage and will reach the self marked by infinite knowledge abiding in Its own form.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Yatha etc.  But, how is it that a single Supreme Self pervades many a Field ?  This doubt has even been removed by the well known example, the sun.  The entire Field :  It means  [all] the movable and immovable Fields.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Ye, those who; viduh, know; evam, thus, in the manner described above; jnana-caksusa, through the eye of wisdom-the eye is the realization in the form of the knowledge of the Self, which arises from following the instructions of the scriptures and teachers; through that eye of wisdom; antaram, the distinction, the particular mutual distinction; ksetra-ksetrajnayoh, beween the field and the Knower of the field as they have been explained; and bhuta-prakrti-moksam, the annihilation of the Matrix of beings-the Matrix of beings is that which is described as ignorance and is called the Unmanifest; (those who know) the annihilation (moksanam) of that Matrix of beings; te, they; yanti, reach, go to; param, the Supreme, to Brahman, the Reality which is the suprme Goal. The idea is that they do not take up a body again.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
The explanation [by Shankara] of 'bhūtaprakṛti-mokṣam' as 'the Prakriti of beings is ignorance, and its moksha means its termination' is incorrect, because it renders the word 'bhūta' (beings/elements) redundant, and since the destruction of ignorance has not been mentioned earlier, it cannot be referred to by 'evam' (thus). With this in mind, the commentator says 'bhūtebhyaḥ...'. By this, a Dvandva compound 'bhūta-prakṛtī' is formed. Then, by the rule of yoga-vibhāga, a Panchami-Tatpurusha compound is indicated. 'bhūtebhyaḥ' means from the elements like earth, etc. If it is objected that 'moksha' (liberation) was not mentioned earlier, it is replied: 'mokṣa-sādhanam' (the means of liberation), meaning the suffix 'ghañ' is used in the sense of instrument. If it is further objected that the means of liberation was also not mentioned, it is replied: 'amānitvādikam' (values like humility, etc.). The idea is that the means of knowledge is also indirectly the means of liberation. Since the word 'moksha' always requires a relation, there is no lack of capacity (asamarthatva). Alternatively, there are two separate sentences to indicate two compounds: from the elements and from Prakriti, and thereafter the explanation of the word 'moksha' is separate.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
He concludes what has been said—'kṣetra...'. Those who, through the vision of the knowledge of truth, know the difference, distinction, and discrimination in the manner described, and also know the means (humility etc.) by which liberation from the Prakriti of beings is achieved, attain the Supreme truth-knowledge that leads to Purushottama (the Supreme Lord).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Now he concludes the meaning of the chapter along with its fruit—'kṣetra...'. Those who, through the eye of wisdom (Self-knowledge born of the instructions of scriptures and teachers), understand the distinction—the mutual difference characterized by insentience and consciousness, mutability and immutability, etc.—between the Kshetra and Kshetrajna as explained before, and also know the liberation, i.e., the dissolution or complete non-existence, through the supreme knowledge of the Self, of the Prakriti of all beings, which is called ignorance or Maya—they reach the Supreme, which is the nature of the Self, i.e., Kaivalya (liberation); meaning they do not take up a body again. Thus, it is established that for one who is devoted to the practice of humility etc., and possesses the discriminative knowledge of Kshetra and Kshetrajna, the supreme human goal is accomplished through the cessation of all miseries.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He concludes the meaning of the chapter—'kṣetra...'. Those who, in the manner described above, know the difference and distinction between the Kshetra and Kshetrajna through the eye of discriminative knowledge, and also know the liberation from this described Prakriti of beings, and the means of liberation such as meditation—they attain the Supreme state.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He concludes the chapter's meaning along with its fruit. Those who, through the eye of wisdom (the direct realization of the Self born of the instructions of scriptures and teachers), understand the distinction—the mutual difference characterized by immutability, changeability, etc.—between the Field (Kshetra) and the Knower of the Field (Kshetrajna) as explained before, and also know the liberation, i.e., the dissolution, of the Prakriti of beings, which is of the nature of ignorance and called the Unmanifest, by means of the supreme knowledge of the Self—they reach the Supreme, the absolute reality, Brahman; meaning they do not take up another body. Thus, in this thirteenth chapter, by defining humility (amanitvam) etc., and by stating that one who is established in these and possesses the true knowledge of Kshetra and Kshetrajna achieves the complete human goal with the cessation of all miseries, the identity of the terms 'Tat' (That) and 'Tvam' (Thou) is established. I bow to that Supreme Self, the non-dual Krishna, who is Shankara, by whom the true nature of Kshetra and Kshetrajna has been well revealed. Thus ends the thirteenth chapter in the Sri Gita-bhashyotkarsha-dipika composed by the learned Dhanpati, the son of Ramakumar, the descendant of Datta family, and disciple of Sri Balaswami Sripada.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Now the fruit of the knowledge of what is to be avoided, what is to be accepted, and the means thereto, which is the main subject of this chapter, is stated: 'kṣetra...'. He explains the word 'evam': in the manner described, i.e., in terms of being ignorant and knowing, being supported and supporter, being subordinate and principal, etc. The word 'antaram' means distinction. In 'jnana-caksusa', the word 'jnana' is used to exclude divine vision etc., and indicates the knowledge acquired from the instruction. Knowledge is called a 'chaxu' (eye) because it causes subsequent direct perception. By this, discrimination is made; the differentiating aspect here is: the liberation from the Prakriti made of elements, or the liberation of beings from Prakriti. As for Shankara's interpretation: 'the Prakriti of beings is of the nature of ignorance, called the Unmanifest, and its liberation means its dissolution', that should be set aside as it contradicts scriptures like 'the beginningless and endless cow...'. Since the fruit of the knowledge of the individual soul is intended here, the word 'param' refers to the purified individual soul. Its supremacy is with respect to its own previous state of worldly existence; hence he says: 'liberated from bondage'. At the beginning of the chapter, Kshetra and Kshetrajna were explained, and indirectly, the group of qualities like humility etc., as the means to attain the purified self; therefore, in this conclusion too, the liberation from Prakriti, mentioned along with Kshetra and Kshetrajna, must refer to that very group of qualities. Hence he says: 'that by which one is liberated'. The word 'mokṣa' is formed in the sense of instrument. Explaining the aspect to be known among the stated, and showing that the mere knowledge of the meaning of the sentences is not the direct cause of liberation but requires practice, and indicating the removal of undesirable things by the term 'bhuta-prakriti-moksha', and the attainment of the desired by 'param yati', he states the unified meaning of the great sentence: 'kṣetra...' Thus in the works of Vedanta-charya Venkatanatha, the lion of poets and logicians, independent in all systems...

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He concludes—'kṣetra...'. Those who, in the manner described above, know through the eye of wisdom the distinction and difference between the Kshetra and Kshetrajna with respect to worldly creation, and also know the means of liberation such as meditation from the Prakriti related to beings which is useful for worldly existence—they attain the Supreme liberation. I bow to that Lord Himself, who having thus described the nature of Kshetra and Kshetrajna, removed the delusion of Arjuna (Phalguna).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He concludes the entire meaning of the chapter—'kṣetra...'. Those who, through the eye of knowledge born of the teachings of scriptures, teachers, and self-experience, know the difference and distinction between the previously mentioned Kshetra and Kshetrajna, caused by their being insentient and sentient, doer and non-doer, changing and unchanging respectively, attain the Supreme, i.e., liberation. Fearing that, like the Sankhyas, we might also claim liberation merely from the knowledge of the distinction between Purusha and the attributes, he says: 'bhūtaprakṛtimokṣam'. Those who know the liberation, i.e., the complete annihilation, through knowledge, of the Prakriti of beings, which is the material cause of space etc., and is three-fold ignorance, they alone reach the Supreme, and not those who merely know the distinction between Kshetra and Kshetrajna. If Prakriti were one, true, and all-pervading, then even for many liberated souls who are unattached seers, its perception would be unavoidable, leading to their bondage. If it is false, then from the perspective of the one who has attained Self-realization, it is completely negated like a snake in a rope and does not exist in all three periods of time, while for others it exists as beginningless and endless. Therefore, liberation does not come from mere knowledge of the distinction between Prakriti and Purusha, but from the knowledge of Purusha through the sublation of Prakriti, just as the fear of a snake is removed by seeing the rope, resulting in freedom from bondage. This is established.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Those who see with eyes of knowledge the difference between the body and the knower of the body, and can also understand the process of liberation from bondage in material nature, attain to the supreme goal.

 The purport of this Thirteenth Chapter is that one should know the distinction between the body, the owner of the body, and the Supersoul. One should recognize the process of liberation, as described in verses 8 through 12. Then one can go on to the supreme destination. A faithful person should at first have some good association to hear of God and thus gradually become enlightened. If one accepts a spiritual master, one can learn to distinguish between matter and spirit, and that becomes the stepping-stone for further spiritual realization. A spiritual master, by various instructions, teaches his students to get free from the material concept of life. For instance, in Bhagavad-gītā we find Kṛṣṇa instructing Arjuna to free him from materialistic considerations. One can understand that this body is matter; it can be analyzed with its twenty-four elements. The body is the gross manifestation. And the subtle manifestation is the mind and psychological effects. And the symptoms of life are the interaction of these features. But over and above this, there is the soul, and there is also the Supersoul. The soul and the Supersoul are two. This material world is working by the conjunction of the soul and the twenty-four material elements. One who can see the constitution of the whole material manifestation as this combination of the soul and material elements and can also see the situation of the Supreme Soul becomes eligible for transfer to the spiritual world. These things are meant for contemplation and for realization, and one should have a complete understanding of this chapter with the help of the spiritual master. Thus end the Bhaktivedanta s to the Thirteenth Chapter of the Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā in the matter of Nature, the Enjoyer and Consciousness.