Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
anubandhaṃ kṣayaṃ hiṃsāmanapekṣya ca pauruṣam .
mohādārabhyate karma yattattāmasamucyate

Word Meanings:
अनुबन्धम् - conseence
क्षयम् - loss
हिंसाम् - injury
अनपेक्ष्य - without regard
च - and
पौरुषम् - ability
मोहात् - from delusion
आरभ्यते - is undertaken
कर्म - action
यत् - which
तत् - that
तामसम् - Tamasic
उच्यते - is said.

Life Application:
Avoid undertaking actions born of delusion that cause harm, financial loss, or exceed your capacity.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
That action which is undertaken from delusion, without regard for consequences, loss, injury, and one's own ability, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
That action which is undertaken from delusion, without a regard for the conseences, loss, injury and (one's own) ability  that is declared to be Tamasic (dark).

अनुबन्धम् conseence? क्षयम् loss? हिंसाम् injury? अनपेक्ष्य without regard? च and? पौरुषम् (ones own) ability? मोहात् from delusion? आरभ्यते is undertaken? कर्म action? यत् which? तत् that? तामसम् Tamasic (dark)? उच्यते is said.Commentary Tamasic acts cause harm to others. A Tamasic man reflects not at all whether he has the capacity to perform these useless actions? but continues to act blindly. With utter thoughtlessness he sets aside any reflection as to the difficulty of performing the action and what the result of it would be. He carries it on in his own egoistical manner. He does not discriminate between the good and the bad? or what is ones own and what belongs to another.Kshayam Loss of power and of wealth? resulting from the performance of an action.Himsa Injury to living beings.Paurusham Ones own ability or capacity to complete the work.Now listen to the characteristics that pertain to the pure agent. The Lord proceeds to deal with the distinction among the agents.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
An action undertaken through delusion, and with no regard to the spiritual issues involved, or the real capacity of the doer, or to the injury which may follow, such an act may be assumed to be the product of Ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Before starting any work, a tamasic person does not consider what its consequence (anubandha) will be, or how much physical and financial strength (ksaya) will be lost. They do not care about the violence or distress caused to others. Driven by delusion and low purposes, their actions are irresponsible. Examples include drinking alcohol, reckless gambling, and corruption. The doers only seek momentary sensory pleasure. While rajasic action takes time to yield sorrow, tamasic action brings painful results immediately. Conversely, the fruit of sattvic action is always bliss. In the upcoming verses, the Lord describes the three types of doers.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The object which is gained, due to ignorance, without  considering the result, the loss, the injury to others and the strength  [of one's own]-that is declared to be of the Tamas (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That act is said to be Tamasika which is undertaken through delusion, without regard to conseences, loss, injury and one's own capacity.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
That action is said to be born of tamas which is undertaken out of delusion, (and) without consideration of its conseence, loss, harm and ability.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Actions undertaken due to non-discrimination or delusion, ignoring future suffering, loss of resources, injury to creatures, and one's capacity, are Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
That action which is undertaken from delusion, without regard to consequences, loss, injury, and one's own capacity, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary: Unlike a seeker who acts with discrimination, a Tamasic person acts without thinking. They start actions without considering: 'Anubandham' (future pain and damage to self and others), 'Ksayam' (loss of physical health, money, time, and reputation), 'Himsam' (injury to creatures and destruction of noble values), and 'Paurusam' (one's own qualifications, strength, and resources). Whatever they feel like doing, they do it blindly.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Anubandha' or conseence is here the pain which follows when a work is performed. 'Loss' means loss of wealth involved in doing that act. 'Injury' is the pain caused to living beings when the work is carried out. 'Capacity' is the ability of completing the act. Whenever an act is begun without consideration of these and from delusion, viz., due to ignoring the agency of the Supreme Person - that act is said to be Tamasika.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.23–18.25 jointly): Explains the threefold nature of action. Action ordained by scripture, performed without attachment or desire for fruit, is Sattvika. Action undertaken with great strain seeking selfish desires or pride is Rajasa. Action initiated through delusion without regard to capacity, loss, or injury is Tamasa.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tat, that; karma, action; yat, which; is arabhyate, undertaken; mohat, out of delusion, non-discrimination; anapeksya, without consideration of; its anubandham, conseence, the result which accrues later; ksayam, loss-that losss which is incurred in the form of loss of energy or loss of wealth in the course of any action; himsam, harm, suffering to creatures; and paurusam, ability, prowess-one's own ability fest as, 'I shall be able to complete this task';-without consideration of these, from 'conseence' to 'ability', ucyate, is said to be; tamasam, born of tamas.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
That action which is undertaken due to delusion, without considering the pain/suffering that follows, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
That action which is begun solely due to non-discrimination, without reflecting on future bad results, loss of strength and wealth, violence to creatures, and one's capacity (as Duryodhana undertook war), is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
That action which is undertaken out of sheer delusion, without reflecting on the future good or bad consequences, expenditure of wealth, injury to others, and one's capacity, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Action commenced out of ignorance without thinking of future results, loss of health and wealth, violence to living entities, and one's capacity, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Actions commenced out of delusion (forgetfulness of the agency of the Supreme Lord), disregarding future suffering, expenditure of resources, injury to creatures, and one's capacity, are Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Action undertaken out of delusion, seeking temporary sense gratification, without considering future bondage, loss of spiritual progress, and injury to self and others, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The action commenced solely from non-discrimination, without evaluating future results, loss of resources, harm to others, and own capability, is Tamasic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
That action performed in illusion, in disregard of scriptural injunctions, and without concern for future bondage or for violence or distress caused to others is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

 One has to give account of one’s actions to the state or to the agents of the Supreme Lord called the Yamadūtas. Irresponsible work is destructive because it destroys the regulative principles of scriptural injunction. It is often based on violence and is distressing to other living entities. Such irresponsible work is carried out in the light of one’s personal experience. This is called illusion. And all such illusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.