Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
adhiṣṭhānaṃ tathā kartā karaṇaṃ ca pṛthagvidham .
vividhāśca pṛthakceṣṭā daivaṃ caivātra pañcamam

Word Meanings:
अधिष्ठानम् - the seat or body
तथा - also
कर्ता - the doer
करणम् - the senses
च - and
पृथग्विधम् - of different
विविधाः - various
च - and
पृथक् - different
चेष्टाः - functions
दैवम् - the presiding deity
च - and
एव - even
अत्र - here
पञ्चमम् - the fifth.

Life Application:
The seat (body), agent, various instruments, distinct functions of breath, and fifth, the divine factor.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The seat (body), the doer, the various senses, the different and distinct functions (of vital airs), and the fifth cause among these is destiny.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The seat (body), the doer, the various senses, the different functions of various sorts, and the presiding deity, also, the fifth.

अधिष्ठानम् the seat or body? तथा also? कर्ता the doer? करणम् the senses? च and? पृथग्विधम् of different? विविधाः various? च and? पृथक् different? चेष्टाः functions? दैवम् the presiding deity? च and? एव even? अत्र here? पञ्चमम् the fifth.Commentary Now listen to the characteristics of these five? of which the body is the first. It is termed the support or the seat. The body is the seat of desire? hatred? happiness? misery? knowledge and the like. The individual soul experiences through the body the pleasure and pain that arise through contact with matter. Egoism is the agent or the doer or the enjoyer. Nature does actions but through delusion the individual soul takes to himself the credit of their execution and? therefore? he is called the agent.Karta The enjoyer putting on the nature or properties of the limiting adjuncts with which he comes into contact.Karanam prithagvidham Various organs such as the organ of hearing? by which the individual soul hears the sound? etc. organs of knowledge and action and the mind.Daivam The presiding deity such as the Sun and the other gods by whose help the eye and the other organs perform their respective functions destiny.Cheshta Play of energy in the organs or the senses during the action.Absence of any of these factors will make action impossible.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
They are a body, a personality, physical organs, their manifold activity and destiny.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Fulfilling His promise, Lord Krishna mentions the names of the five causes for the accomplishment of action in this verse. Here, a slight difference is found among the commentators of the Gita in explaining the meanings of the presented words. However, this difference is not of much importance. Every action has to be performed only with the help of the physical body (seat), because this is the dwelling place of the organs of knowledge and the organs of action. This body cannot perform any action on its own. The individual soul (doer) who wears this body alone desires sense objects and then performs actions for their fulfillment. For grasping sense objects, it requires the organs of knowledge, which are indicated here by the word instrument (karana). Without these instruments, the experiencing individual soul can neither acquire knowledge of this world nor enjoy it. Sri Shankaracharya, in his commentary, explains the distinct functions (cheshta) as the functions of vital airs like prana, apana, etc. This explanation is sufficient for students familiar with Vedantic principles. But it is difficult for common people to understand its meaning. It is as a result of vital functions that the health of the body is maintained, which enables a man to perform actions. Therefore, for the purpose of understanding this verse, we can take the word "cheshta" to mean the organs of action. As has been said in many places in the Gita itself, there are presiding deities of our senses, by whose grace the organs of hearing, sight, etc. are able to grasp their respective objects. These deities are indicated here by the word destiny or divinity (daivam). In summary, the five causes of the performance of action are: (1) body (locus), (2) doer (individual soul), (3) organs of knowledge, (4) organs of action, and (5) destiny, i.e., the presiding deities. The Lord says further:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The basis, as well as the agent, and diverse instruments, and distinct activity of various kinds and Destiny, which is certainly the fifth [factor].

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The seat of action and likewise the agent, the various kinds of organs, the different and distinctive functions of vital air and also the fifth among these, Divinity.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The locus as also the agent, the different kinds of organs, the many and distinct activities, and, the divine is here the fifth.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
"adhiṣṭhānam" is the body, etc. The doer (karta) is Vishnu, for He indeed is declared as the doer of all; and the proof for the non-agency of the individual self is also stated. "karanam" is the senses, etc. "ceṣṭāḥ" are activities; by activities like hands, etc., actions such as sacrifice, etc. are produced. Even for meditation (dhyana), etc., the mental function is the cause. The past function also becomes the cause of impressions (samskaras). "daivam" is destiny (adrishtam). And so says the Ayasya-sruti: "The body, Brahman, senses, etc., activities, and destiny as the fifth, are the causes of action."

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having said that the seat, etc. which are meant for action must be known because they are rooted in authority, He now specifies them after raising a question in: "Which are they...?" etc. Taking the words of the verse, he explains: "adhisthanam...". The word "doer" (karta) means one whose nature is the limiting adjunct such as intellect, etc.; i.e., who follows the intellect, perceives its attributes in the Self, is associated with it, and is predominated by it. Therein, he indicates the inference which has the effect as its mark: "sound, etc.". The number twelve consists of the five organs of knowledge, five organs of action, mind, and intellect. The manifoldness of functions (cheshta) means their being of various kinds; he clarifies that itself: "connected with air...". "distinctness" (prithaktvam) means non-mixture. Indeed, there is no mutual mixture of the functions of prana, apana, etc. He explains "daivam" (the divine) as: "the Sun, etc."

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
In this (accomplishment of actions), the seat, the doer, the various kinds of organs, the many and distinct functions, and similarly the fifth cause is destiny (impressions). Commentary — adhiṣṭhānam — The body, and the place where this body is situated — both of these are the seat (adhishthana). karta — All activities occur only through Nature (prakriti) and the effects of Nature. Whether those activities are collective (samashti) or individual (vyashti), their doer is not the Self. Only an ignorant person whose mind is deluded by egoism, i.e., who does not have knowledge of the conscious and the insentient, when he assumes the activities occurring from Nature to be his own, then he becomes the doer. Such a doer alone becomes a factor in the accomplishment of actions. karaṇaṃ ca prithagvidham — There are thirteen instruments (karana) in total. Hands, feet, speech, organ of generation, and organ of excretion — these five are the organs of action; and ears, eyes, skin, tongue, and nose — these five are the organs of knowledge; these ten are the external instruments; and mind, intellect, and egoism — these three are the internal instruments. vividhāśca prithakceṣṭāḥ — The above-mentioned thirteen instruments have distinct functions (cheshta), for example: hands — taking and giving; feet — coming and going, walking; speech — speaking; organ of generation — excretion of urine; organ of excretion — excretion of feces; ears — hearing; eyes — seeing; skin — touching; tongue — tasting; nose — smelling; mind — reflecting; intellect — deciding; and egoism — pride of being like this, etc. daivaṃ caivātra pañcamam — The name of the fifth factor in the accomplishment of actions is destiny. Here, destiny (daivam) refers to impressions (samskaras). Whatever action a man performs, a corresponding impression is stamped on his mind. An auspicious action leaves an auspicious impression, and an inauspicious action leaves an inauspicious impression. Those very impressions generate the urge (sphurana) to perform actions in the future. One who has more impressions of a particular action can engage in that action with greater ease; and to perform an action for which one has no special impression, one may have to put in some effort. Similarly, when a man listens, reads books, and reflects, he does those also only according to his own impressions. The implication is that according to the auspicious and inauspicious impressions in a man's mind, the urge to perform actions arises. In this verse, five factors are stated in the accomplishment of actions: seat (locus), doer, instrument, effort (function), and destiny. The reason is: without a basis, where can any work be performed? Therefore, the word seat (adhishthana) has come. Without a doer, who will perform the activity? Therefore, the word doer (karta) has come. Only when there are means of action (instruments), can the doer perform activity; therefore, the word instrument (karana) has come. Even if there are means of action, if activity is not carried out, how will the action be accomplished? Therefore, the word effort or function (cheshta) has come. The doer will perform activity only according to his own impressions, and cannot act against or without his impressions; therefore, the word destiny (daivam) has come. Thus, only when these five are present, does the accomplishment of action occur.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
For all actions, performed through body, words or mind, whether they be authorized by the Sastras or not, the causes are these five. (1) The body, which is a conglomeration of the 'great elements,' is known as the seat, since it is governed by the individual self. (2) The agent is the individual self. That this individual self is the knower and the agent is established in the Vedanta-Sutras:  'For this reason, (the individual self) is the knower' (2.3.18) and 'The agent, on account of the scripture having a purport' (2.3.33.). (3) The organs of various kinds are the five motor organs like that of speech, hands, feet etc., along with the mind. They are of various kinds, viz., they have different functions in completing an action. (4) The different and distinctive functions of vital air - here the expression 'functions' (Cesta) means several functions. Distinctive are the functions of this fivefold vital air which sustains the body and senses through its divisions of Prana, Apana etc. (5) Divinity is the fifth among these causes. The purport is this:  Among these, which constitute the conglomeration of causes of work the Divinity is the fifth. It is the Supreme Self, the Inner Ruler, who is the main cause in completing the action.

It has been already affirmed:  'I am seated in the hearts of all. From Me are memory, knowledge and their removal also' (15.15), and He will say further:  'The Lord, O Arjuna, lives in the heart of every being casuing them to spin round and round by His power as if set on a wheel' (18.61). The agency of the individual self is dependent on the Supreme Self as established in the aphorism:  'But from the Supreme, because the scripture says so' (B. S., 2.3.41).

Now an objection may be raised in this way:  If the agency of the individual self is dependent on the Supreme Self and the individual self cannot be charged with moral responsibility, then the scriptures containing injunctions and prohibitions become useless, as the individual self cannot be enjoined to act in regard to any action. The objection is disposed off by the author of the Vedanta-Sutras in the aphorism:  'But with a view to the effects made on account of the purposelessness of injunctions and prohibitions' (2.3.42).

The purport is this:  By means of his senses, body etc., granted by the Supreme Self - having Him for their support, empowered by Him, and thus deriving power from Him - the individual self begins, of his own free will, the effort for directing the senses etc., for the purpose of performing actions conditioned by his body and organs. The individual self Itself, of Its own free will, is responsible for activity, since the Supreme Self, abiding within, causes It to act only by granting His permission, just as works such as moving heavy stones and timber are collectively the labour of many persons and they are together responsible for the effect. But each one of them (severally) also is responsible for it. In the same way each individual is answerable to Nature's law in the form of positive and negative ?ndments.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.13–18.17 jointly): Panca etc. upto na nibadhyate Conclusion :  the established end, because here a decision is arrived at.  Basis : the material object Destiny :  the good and  bad result  [of actions] previously accumulated.  These five viz., the basis etc., constitute the entire assembly of factors and hence they are the causes for each action.
 
But other [commentators give an etymology of]  adhisthana 'basis' to mean 'That by which all actions are governed'; and on that ground they believe that it denotes that action which exists in the intellect; which comes ot be due to the Rajas, and is being prone to transform itself into the pentad of (the mental dispositions viz.)  the content, the faith, the happiness, the desire to know and the aversion to know; which is referable by the term karma-yoga  (that which yokes man into activity); and which is described at times by the term prayatna 'effort'.
 
Agent :  the ascertainer characterised by the intellect.  Instrument :  [the personal instruments viz.] the mind, the eye etc., and also the external ones like sword etc.  Activity :  the activity of  upper life-breath, nether life-breath etc.  The effects of the righteous and unrighteous acts are indicated by the term Destiny.  All the dispositions located in the intellect are indicated by these two.  Still other commentators, however, take Basis to be the Absolute Lord.
 
Due to his  imperfect intellect :  because of his having indecisive  knowledge.  But he, who performs actions with the stability due to disappearance of th I-sense  (limited) and  [a stability] refined by hundreds of reasoning, as detailed earlier - he does not get the fetter, because he is a man of perfect intellect.  This is what is intended  [in the passage under study].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Adhisthanam, the locus, the body, which is the seat, the basis, of the manifestation of desire, hatred, happiness, sorrow, knowledge, etc.; tatha, as also karta, the agent, the enjoyer [The individual Self which has intelligence etc. as its limiting adjuncts, due to which it appears to possess their characteristics and become identified with them.] who has assumed the characteristics of the limiting adjuncts; prthak vidham, the different kinds of; karanam, organs, the ears etc. which, twelve [The five organs of knowledge (eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin), the five organs of actions (hands, feet, speech, organ of excertion and that of generation), the mind and the intellect.] in number, are of different kinds for the experience of sound etc.; the vividhah, many; and prthak, distinct; cesta, activities connected with air-exhalation, inhalation, etc.; ca eva, and; daivam, the divine, i.e. the Sun and the others who are the presiding deities of the eye etc.; is atra, here, in relation to these four; pancamam, the fifth-completing the five.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
He will say that the seat, etc. are indeed included in the instruments; to make that understood, he indicates the seat in: "adhisthanam...". By "etc.", earth, etc. are meant. With the intent that the explanation "the doer is the individual self" is incorrect, he says: "the doer...". To the question: "How is Vishnu the doer of actions performed through body, speech, and mind?", he says: "He indeed...". This has been stated and established. Even so, why should the individual self not be the doer here? To this he says: "and of the individual self...". This refutation is with the intent of independent agency; since dependent agency of the individual self is admitted and explained elsewhere, there is no contradiction. To refute the appearance of the instrument being the act itself, he says: "instrument...". By "etc.", ladle, etc. are meant. Because that which denotes the act itself is what is to be accomplished, and it is already grasped by the inclusion of effort (cheshta). The explanation (of Shankara), "the functions of vital airs like prana, apana, etc. are the functions (cheshta)", is incorrect. Because if a substance (air) is denoted, it cannot properly be a function. And if breathing, etc. are denoted, they are what are to be accomplished, hence they cannot properly be the factor of action (karaka). With this intent he says: "activities...". To the question: "Since activities are what accomplish action, how are they factors?", he says: "by hands, etc.". Indeed, an instrument containing subordinate activity is called a factor. Therein, by words like seat, etc., the agents of activity are indicated, whereas by the word activity, the subordinate activities are indicated. The meaning is: the generation of the principal action by subordinate activities resting on the factors is indeed well-known. Objection: "But here, in the context of declaring the factors, only the seat, etc. are mentioned; why are the object (karma), recipient (sampradana), and starting point (apadana) not mentioned?" We reply: "Because the seat, etc. follow all actions, whereas the object, etc. do not." And so He will say: "Whatever action a man undertakes through body, speech, and mind..." (Gita 18.15). If so, then effort (cheshta) also should not be mentioned, because in producing meditation, etc., the instrument (mind) has no physical effort. To this he says: "even for meditation, etc." By "etc.", remembering is grasped; meditation occurs only on an object already known; and knowledge arises only by the mind in contact with the Self and senses, and contact is generated by mental effort; therefore, the effort related to the mind is the cause even of meditation, etc. This is the idea. Objection: "But a cause is that which is invariably antecedent; and in the moment preceding meditation, there is no activity in the mind because it has long passed, since meditation is accomplished by the stillness of the mind. Nor is it the instrument through contact and knowledge, because that too has long passed." To this he says: "past...". The meaning is: the past mental activity, even though long passed, becomes through contact the cause of the impression which is the cause of meditation, etc., because the impression which is the cause of meditation, etc. is stable. Some say that "daivam" is the activity of the Inner Ruler; that is incorrect, because it is already stated by "doer". Others say that it is the Sun, etc. who are the presiding deities of the eye, etc. That too is incorrect, because they are already grasped by the words instrument, etc. With this intent he says: "daivam is destiny (adrishtam)". He supports the stated meaning by the authority of the Sruti also: "And so...". "Body" is illustrative. "Factor" (hetu) means cause. In the reading "karma hetu", there is a Vedic variation of gender.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
To explain, "adhiṣṭhānam...". For all actions performed through body, speech, and mind, whether they be scriptural (proper) or opposite (prohibited), these five are the causes. He states them: The seat (adhishthana) is the first cause, the body; the doer (karta) is the individual self associated with egoism, who is the knower, as established in the aphorism: "The agent, on account of the scripture having a purport" (Brahma Sutras 2.3.33); the instrument (karanam) is of various kinds, consisting of the mind, eyes, ears, etc. divided into organs of knowledge and action; the distinct activities (cheshtah) are the functions of vital airs, etc., which are the causes in action according to the nature of the work; and destiny (daivam) is the fifth, which is destiny (adrishtam) according to some (the followers of Madhva). But in reality, it means the Supreme, in the form of the Inner Ruler, who completes the number five and is the principal cause in the performance of all actions. For the glory of His own nature abiding within was stated before by the Lord, the Supreme Person: "seated in the hearts of all" (Gita 13.17). And it was also said by the revered preceptor (Vallabha): "In reality, there is no divinity higher than Krishna, who is free from all defects." And in the aphorisms also, the agency of the individual self, body, senses, etc. which is dependent on Him, the Inner Self, is established: "And as the carpenter in both ways" (Brahma Sutras 2.3.40). Here, the commentator (Vallabha) says: "Objection: Since the distinction of agency and experiencing is seen in the case of performers of action, there will indeed be a difference between agency and experiencing. No, just as a carpenter, having built a chariot, mounts it and sports, or does not act on a wooden seat by himself but through tools like an adze, and by the word 'and', others are agents for their own sake. If it is said that he acts for the sake of another also, in the present case too, it is because He strives for the welfare of all. And agency itself is not of the nature of pain, because activities like drinking milk are of the nature of pleasure. Thus, agency and causing to act for one's own sake and for another's sake are established. And further: 'But from the Supreme, because the scripture says so' (Brahma Sutras 2.3.41). Agency belongs to Brahman alone; the agency of the individual self is only due to connection with Him, on account of being His part, like lordship, etc. It does not belong to the insentient alone. Therefore, passages like 'There is no other seer than He' (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 3.7.23) show that His all-agency is reasonable. Why is this? From the scripture, because He alone is heard to be the doer and the causer of action: 'He makes him perform good action whom He wishes to lead up, and He makes him perform bad action whom He wishes to lead down.' He is the doer of all, the enjoyer of all, and the ruler of all; since He is of the form of all, there is no defect in the Lord. And so says the aphorism: 'But with a view to the effort made, on account of the purposelessness of injunctions and prohibitions' (Brahma Sutras 2.3.42). Objection: 'There is no refutation of partiality and cruelty, because due to beginninglessness He alone is the causer of action.' The word 'but' (tu) refutes this view. The effort up to the final stage is the act of the individual self, and since it is impossible for him beyond that, He Himself causes him to act. Just as a father, even while describing the qualities and defects of an object to his striving son or child, seeing his persistence in effort, makes him act in that very manner. To be the cause everywhere, He restates the desire that exists at the time of giving fruits in: 'He wishes to lead up, He wishes to lead down'. Otherwise, there would be the uselessness and unauthoritativeness of injunctions and prohibitions. To protect the law of order: 'In giving fruits, He depends on action; in the cause of action, He depends on effort; in desire, He depends on the flow', He created the Vedas. Therefore, there is not even a scent of defect in Brahman, nor is there lack of lordship, because in the path of law it is determined in that very manner. Where it is otherwise, that is in the path of grace (Pushti).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Having said that the five factors of action which are rooted in authority must be known for the sake of being abandoned in order to establish the non-agency of the Self, He now states their nature in the second verse: "adhisthanam...". The seat (adhishthana) is the body, which is the locus of the manifestation of desire, hatred, happiness, sorrow, and consciousness. As also the doer (karta); just as the seat is non-Self, physical, and illusory, so also the doer, by being the locus of superimposition of the reflection of consciousness (chidabhasa), grasps its attributes and modifications; and by the superimposition of identity with it, is of the form of the knot of the conscious and the insentient, associated with the limiting adjunct of intellect, etc., and is indeed non-Self. And the instrument (karanam) is of various kinds, twelve in number such as eyes, ears, speech, hands, etc. for the experience of sound, etc., and for the performance of various activities like speech, hands, etc. And the distinct functions (cheshtah) are of various kinds, which are the functions (activities) of the fivefold vital air divided into prana, apana, etc., having separate loci and actions. And destiny (daivam) is indeed here the presiding deities like the Sun, etc. of the eye, etc. which completes the five and is the fifth cause. Here, among these four, destiny is the fifth, which is the grace-giver producing the capacity of their respective actions in the seat, etc. which constitute the rest of the assembly of causes. By the word "and" (ca), destiny (adrishtam) also, consisting of previously performed virtue and vice, is grasped as cause. Thus, He will say in the sequel that when actions are being performed by these five causes, there is no agency of the pure Self.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
"adhisthanam" (the seat). Therein, the seat is the body, which is the locus or basis of the action desired to be performed. And the doer (karta) is the imagined enjoyer, who is the knot of the conscious and the insentient, and is composed of the attributes (gunas). And the instrument (karanam) is of various kinds, consisting of twelve organs divided into organs of knowledge and action. And the distinct functions (cheshtah) are of various kinds, consisting of functions divided into prana, apana, etc. And destiny (daivam) is indeed destiny (adrishtam), which completes the five and is the fifth cause. Or, among these four, destiny which is the presiding deity of the seat, etc. is the fifth.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Thus, having stated the absence of the threefold fruit of action in the case of primary sannyasis, He speaks the verse beginning with "pañcaitāni..." in order to teach the necessity of the knowledge of the non-agency of the Self, which is the cause of qualification for primary sannyasa. Learn, i.e., know from My words, these factors going to be mentioned which are the producers of action. And addressing him as "mighty-armed" (Mahabaho), He hints: "Having known this, abandon the pride of agency in this physical action of war which is to be accomplished by mighty arms." In order to praise them to indicate that they must definitely be known, He says: "sāṅkhye...". "Sankhya" is the scripture of Vedanta in which the Self (the meaning of the word "thou"), Brahman (the meaning of the word "that"), the comprehension of their identity, and also things like control of the mind and senses, etc. which are useful for that, are fully stated (sankhyayante), i.e., explained. He qualifies Sankhya by "kritante": where the termination (anta) of actions performed (kritam) occurs. Since the cessation of all actions is shown when Self-knowledge arises, the Sankhya which is meant for Self-knowledge is also called "kritanta". "declared in that" means they are spoken of for the accomplishment, i.e., performance, of all actions. The meaning, "Sankhya is liberating knowledge, and in that which is related to it and produces it, in the non-created (akrita) Veda due to its being of non-human origin, and in the end (anta) of that, i.e., in Vedanta", was not shown by the teachers, keeping in mind that the meaning is possible indeed without resorting to division of words. As for what others explain: "Sankhya is that in which the principles are counted (sankhyayante); 'kritanta' is that in which the final decision (anta) is made; meaning: declared in the Sankhya philosophy itself" — that is not to be accepted. Because in the Sankhya philosophy, the seat, etc. are not stated as the causes of action. And also because the Sankhya philosophy, which propounds that the experiencing selves are many, is contradictory to one's own established conclusion that the Self is one, free from agency and experiencing; hence it cannot be cited as authority for the meaning stated by oneself.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Explaining the connection of the statement of the five causes immediately after "undesired, desired..." (Gita 18.12), he says: "now...". The meaning is: when the direct subject of the question has been answered. By the two words "in the Lord, the Supreme Person", the state of being the Inner Ruler of all and the absence of defects residing in Him and caused by Him are declared in the manner stated before. By saying "He states the manner", it is shown that the contemplation of non-agency which has been followed since the third chapter is here clarified with reasons on the nature of the self as it is. When the three kinds of abandonment have been introduced, the connection is the clarification of the manner of one of them. When all three kinds of abandonment have been introduced as Sattvik, why is only the manner of abandonment of agency expounded? To this he says: "therefore alone...". The word "iti" here denotes cause. Even though the priests, etc. are the agents, possessiveness for action and fruit is seen in the sacrificer (yajamana); why should it not be similar in the case of the individual self? Therefore, how can the notion of possessiveness for action and fruit cease merely by the abandonment of agency? To this he says: "for the Supreme Person...". The word "hi" (for/indeed) indicates that this is well-known in authority. He states what is well-known in passages like: "O Hari, You sport with living beings like playing balls, which go down and up as pulled by the thread of action..." and "Indeed, this world of moving and non-moving beings exists for the sake of Krishna" (Mahabharata 2.38.23), by: "with His own..." etc. Indeed, the Supreme Person is declared in scriptures as the Lord of the lords of instruments (organs). Therefore, even when the instruments are auxiliary to the individual self, the state of the Supreme Person as the principal Lord does not cease, just like the king's ownership of ornaments on elephants and horses. With this intent he says: "with His own instruments, body, and life-breaths". Since there is no limiting factor, the giving of visible and invisible fruits is also His sport; thus he says: "for the purpose of His sport". The idea is that this has been discussed in aphorisms like: "But His creation is mere sport, as in ordinary life" (Brama Sutras 2.1.33), etc. But in the reading "for the purpose of sport, etc.", the word "etc." grasps protection of devotees, etc., which is rooted in compassion, etc. Objection: "Since scriptural action is ordained only as the worship of the Supreme Person, it is proper that the action up to its fruit belongs to Him. But worldly action is not so ordained, nor is it perceived as such, because the fruit like the removal of hunger is experienced as belonging only to the individual self; therefore, since worldly fruits are auxiliary to the individual self, it is proper that action which is the means to them is also for his sake. Hence, it is impossible to establish the abandonment of attachment for all objects by statements like 'for the accomplishment of all actions'." To this he says: "Therefore...". "of the Supreme Person alone" — the genitive case rests on the specific relationship of owned and owner. The idea is: just as the nourishment of a caged bird and its happiness, etc. are auxiliary to the emperor, so also here. By "sāṅkhye kṛtānte", the Sankhya philosophy is not intended, because God is not admitted there; and since agency is not admitted for anyone other than the instruments, the statement of division of agent and instrument in "the agent, and the various kinds of instruments" (Gita 18.14) would be impossible; and since it is opposed to the Vedas, it is improper to cite it for teaching the Truth; and even if it is not opposed, since its Vedic origin must be accepted, it rests indeed on the Veda; and by all it is agreed to abandon the conventional sense and resort to the etymological sense for the sake of propriety of meaning. Therefore, with the intent that the portion of the Vedas which is engaged in determining the Truth of things as they are is intended by the words "sankhya-kritante", he explains etymologically: "Sankhya means Buddhi (reasoning)". In accordance with the context, he qualifies Buddhi: "as they are...". What was said here by Shankara: "Sankhya is that scripture where the subject-matters are fully stated, which is Vedanta; that itself is 'kritanta', meaning that in this occurs the termination (anta) of action performed (kritam)" — that is incorrect; because the connection of action is established in Vedanta also; and when the abandonment of conventional sense is inevitable, it is proper to grasp only the most appropriate etymological sense. The word "anta" is read by lexicographers as meaning "decision" (nischaya). With the intent that this decision is qualified by the word "krita" because it is accomplished after deliberation by Buddhi, he says: "in the decision determined after due deliberations". Or, the word "decision" here refers to the determined object, because the word "kritanta", which is a synonym of "siddhanta", is conventional in the sense of the accepted meaning of each school. For this very reason, it is qualified as "determined after due deliberations". Indeed, it is not the decision itself that is to be deliberated upon. Or, the idea is: the decision of the ancients was deliberated upon by others. Or, the word "decision" here refers to the deciding text. In that case, there is connection with the word "declared". By the word "accomplishment" (siddhaye), the reaching of fruit, etc., is not intended here; because immediately after this it is said: "whatever action a man undertakes... these five are its causes" (Gita 18.15), showing the accomplishment of the form of action itself. With this intent he says: "for the production". Since "My causes" is impossible, and in the statement "causes belonging to Me" there is no connection because He who is indicated by the word "destiny" cannot belong to Himself, he states the appropriate connection: "learn from Me, i.e., from My presence". The idea is: this is for the purpose of enjoining concentration of the mind on the distinct causality of the five factors going to be mentioned according to each system. With the intent that this section is contradictory to those who do not accept the twenty-sixth principle (God) and who propound that the twenty-fifth principle (individual self) is the sole locus of superimposition of agency, he establishes that it refers to the etymological sense: "indeed, the Vedic...". "having body, senses, life-breath, and individual self as instruments" is a Bahuvrihi compound. "Instrument" (upakaranam) means the accessories taken for the sake of the intended effect.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus, having pointed them out, He specifies them: "adhisthanam...". The seat (adhishthana) is the body, which is so called because it is occupied as the basis or locus of the action desired to be performed; as also the doer (karta), which is the imagined enjoyer, i.e., the individual self who is the knot of the conscious and the insentient, and is composed of the attributes; as also the instrument (karanam) of various kinds, twelve in number, consisting of the organs of knowledge like ears, etc., the organs of action like hands, feet, etc., and the mind and intellect; and the distinct functions (cheshtah) which are of various kinds and are separate, such as prana, apana, etc.; destiny (daivam) is indeed here the presiding deities like the Sun, etc. of the eye, etc. which completes the five and is the fifth cause.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He states those causes: "adhisthanam...". The seat (adhishthana) is the body. The doer (karta) is the individual self who is the reflection of consciousness (chidabhasa). The instrument (karanam) is twelvefold, consisting of the organs of knowledge, the organs of action, the mind, and the intellect. The functions (cheshtah) are the functions of vital airs like prana, apana, etc. Destiny (daivam) is destiny (adrishtam) consisting of virtue and vice, and by the two words "and" (ca), the presiding deities like the Sun, etc. are also included. By contemplating this, the wise man remains happily free from the taint of action. The ignorant person also, contemplating: "these factors alone perform actions, but not the Self", gradually becomes purified. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The place of action [the body], the performer, the various senses, the many different kinds of endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul – these are the five factors of action.

 The word adhiṣṭhānam refers to the body. The soul within the body is acting to bring about the results of activity and is therefore known as kartā, “the doer.” That the soul is the knower and the doer is stated in the śruti. Eṣa hi draṣṭā sraṣṭā ( Praśna Upaniṣad 4.9). It is also confirmed in the Vedānta-sūtra by the verses jño ’ta eva (2.3.18) and kartā śāstrārthavattvāt (2.3.33). The instruments of action are the senses, and by the senses the soul acts in various ways. For each and every action there is a different endeavor. But all one’s activities depend on the will of the Supersoul, who is seated within the heart as a friend. The Supreme Lord is the supercause. Under these circumstances, he who is acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul situated within the heart is naturally not bound by any activity. Those in complete Kṛṣṇa consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions. Everything is dependent on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.