Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
etāṃ dṛṣṭimavaṣṭabhya naṣṭātmāno.alpabuddhayaḥ .
prabhavantyugrakarmāṇaḥ kṣayāya jagato.ahitāḥ

Word Meanings:
एताम् - this
दृष्टिम् - view
अवष्टभ्य - holding
नष्टात्मानः - ruined souls
अल्पबुद्धयः - of small intellect
प्रभवन्ति - come forth
उग्रकर्माणः - of fierce deeds
क्षयाय - for the destruction
जगतः - of the world
अहिताः - enemies.

Life Application:
Holding material views, ruined in intellect, of small understanding, fierce deeds, they rise as enemies for destruction.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Holding fast to this view, these ruined souls of small intellect and fierce deeds come forth as the enemies of the world for its destruction.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Holding this view, these ruined souls of small intellect and fierce deeds, come forth as the enemies of the world for its destruction.

एताम् this? दृष्टिम् view? अवष्टभ्य holding? नष्टात्मानः ruined souls? अल्पबुद्धयः of small intellect? प्रभवन्ति come forth? उग्रकर्माणः of fierce deeds? क्षयाय for the destruction? जगतः of the world? अहिताः enemies.Commentary They rob others. They acire wealth by destroying others. They boast of their evil actions.Nashtatmanah Ruined souls They have lost all chances of attaining Selfrealisation or going to the higher world.Alpabuddhayah They have a small intellect as they identify themselves with their little bodies full of impurities? as they have no conception of the Supreme Beign? and as their intellects are concerned with the little sensual pleasures only (eating? drinking? etc.).Ugrakarmanah Of fierce deeds They always injure others. They murder for aciring wealth. They do any heinous crime to get money and women. They bring great confusion and destroy the peace and harmony of the world.Enemies of the world World here means people who live in the world.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Thinking thus, these degraded souls, these enemies of mankind - whose intelligence is negligible and whose deeds are monstrous - come into the world only to destroy.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Holding this view, these ruined souls of small intellect and fierce deeds, come forth as the enemies of the world for its destruction.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that when a society adopts a purely materialistic view, ignoring any spiritual foundation, it inevitably leads to self-destruction. Ruined souls (nashtatmanah) are those who have forgotten their divine nature and behave like madmen or beasts. Lacking discrimination, their intellect is limited (alpa-buddhayah) only to immediate selfish gains. Their fierce deeds (ugra-karmanah) and selfishness create friction and chaos. Such people become enemies of the world (ahitah jagatah), inventing destructive weapons and leading the world toward wars and collapse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Clinging to this view, the inauspcious men of the ruined Souls, of the poor intellect, and of the cruel deeds, strive for the destruction of the world.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Holding this view, these men of lost souls and fele understanding do cruel deeds for the destruction of the world.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Holding on to this view, (these people) who are of depraved character, of poor intellect, given to fearful actions and harmful, wax strong for the ruin of the world.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the materialistic view leads people away from spiritual evolution, limiting their intellect to immediate sense objects. Consequently, they engage in violent and harmful acts that threaten the peace of the world.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Holding fast to this view, these ruined souls of small intellect and fierce deeds come forth as the enemies of the world for its destruction.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that by embracing atheism and materialism, these people lose their connection to the eternal soul (nashtatmanah). Their intellect becomes shallow (alpa-buddhayah), focused only on worldly wealth and enjoyment. Unchecked by fear of God or moral laws, they commit horrific, violent crimes (ugra-karmanah) and act as enemies of society, using their power and inventions solely to destroy the world.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Holding this view, viz., supporting this view, these men of lost souls do not realise that the self is different from the body. They are of 'fele understanding,' they lack the discernment that the self is to be known as different from the body, because of Its being the knower in the body which is an object of knowledge such as jars etc. These are of 'cruel deeds' viz., they do much harm to everybody; they are born to bring ruin to the world.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.9–16.12 jointly): Etam etc. upto arthasancayam :  Their anxiety ends only at the time of dissolution i.e. never ceases, becaue the rise and dissolution never end.  This much alone :  For them the highest goal to be achieved is but the gratification of desires, and when this (aim) is just ruined, there arises anger.  Hence the Lord says 'Devoted to their craving and anger'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Avastabhya, holding on to; etam, this; drstim, view; (these people) who are nasta-atmanah, of depraved character, who have deviated from the disciplines leading to the other world; alpa-budhayah, of poor intellect, whose intellect is indeed limited, engrossed with material things; ugra-kamanah, given to fearful actions-who are cruel by nature; and ahitah, harmful; i.e. inimical to the world; prabhavanti, wax strong; ksayaya, for the ruin; jagatah, of the world. This is the construction.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that this atheistic view leads to complete spiritual ruin (nashtatmanah). Their intellect is extremely small (alpa-buddhayah), seeking only immediate sensory desires, and they take births as fierce creatures (like tigers and serpents) or cruel humans to destroy the world.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that by adopting this materialist view, their minds become impure (nashtatmanah). Being of small intellect, focused only on visible objects, they engage in violent deeds as enemies of the world for its destruction.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that this destructive view leads to spiritual ruin. Lacking faith in the next world, their actions are cruel and they serve only as enemies of the living beings, causing world destruction.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'nashtatmanah' means those who have lost the vision of the soul as distinct from the body. Lacking discrimination, they perform cruel deeds that lead to the moral and physical degradation of society.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that clinging to the view that lust is the only cause of life leads to spiritual ruin. Their intellect is limited only to what can be perceived, and their violent deeds cause others to fall into hell.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the lack of spiritual intellect makes them focus only on temporary visible pleasures, making them violent (ugrakarmanah) and harmful to others.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves and who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible works meant to destroy the world.

 The demoniac are engaged in activities that will lead the world to destruction. The Lord states here that they are less intelligent. The materialists, who have no concept of God, think that they are advancing. But according to Bhagavad-gītā , they are unintelligent and devoid of all sense. They try to enjoy this material world to the utmost limit and therefore always engage in inventing something for sense gratification. Such materialistic inventions are considered to be advancement of human civilization, but the result is that people grow more and more violent and more and more cruel, cruel to animals and cruel to other human beings. They have no idea how to behave toward one another. Animal killing is very prominent amongst demoniac people. Such people are considered the enemies of the world because ultimately they will invent or create something which will bring destruction to all. Indirectly, this verse anticipates the invention of nuclear weapons, of which the whole world is today very proud. At any moment war may take place, and these atomic weapons may create havoc. Such things are created solely for the destruction of the world, and this is indicated here. Due to godlessness, such weapons are invented in human society; they are not meant for the peace and prosperity of the world.