Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
dūreṇa hyavaraṃ karma buddhiyogāddhanañjaya .
buddhau śaraṇamanviccha kṛpaṇāḥ phalahetavaḥ

Word Meanings:
दूरेण - by far
हि - indeed
अवरम् - inferior
कर्म - action or work
बुद्धियोगात् - than the Yoga of wisdom
धनञ्जय - O Dhananjaya
बुद्धौ - in wisdom
शरणम् - refuge
अन्विच्छ - seek
कृपणाः - wretched
फलहेतवः - seekers after fruits.

Life Application:
Shift your motivation from seeking personal rewards to offering your best effort for the common good.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Action performed with desire is far inferior to this yoga of the intellect (equanimity). Therefore, O Dhananjaya, take refuge in the intellect; those who act for the sake of results are pitiable (wretched).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Far lower than the Yoga of wisdon is action, O Arjuna. Seek thou refuge in wisdom; wretched are they whose motive is the fruit.

दूरेण by far? हि indeed? अवरम् inferior? कर्म action or work? बुद्धियोगात् than the Yoga of wisdom? धनञ्जय O Dhananjaya? बुद्धौ in wisdom? शरणम् refuge? अन्विच्छ seek? कृपणाः wretched? फलहेतवः seekers after fruits.Commentary Action done with evenness of mind is Yoga of wisdom. The yogi who is established in the Yoga of widdom is not affected by success or failure. He does not seek fruits of his actions. He has poised reason. His reason is rooted in the Self. Action performed by one who expects fruits for his actions? is far inferior to the Yoga of wisdom wherein the seeker does not seek fruits because the former leads to bondage and is the cause of birth and death. (Cf.VIII.18).

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Physical action is far inferior to an intellect concentrated on the Divine. Have recourse then to Pure Intelligence. It is only the petty-minded who work for reward.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Action performed with a mind free from anxiety about its fruits, in a calm state, is certainly superior to action performed with an agitated, anxious mind. Some commentators, seeing the term 'buddhiyoga' used here, imagine that a wholly new yoga is being taught in the Gita. But this seems to me a forced interpretation. In the Upanishads, the determinative faculty of the inner instrument is called buddhi (intellect), while its faculty of oscillation and doubt is called manas (mind). When the mind's tendencies are in a state of doubt and distraction, they are called manas; when the mind is in a state of concentration, certainty and calm, that same faculty is called buddhi. Thus buddhiyoga means being firmly established, with steadiness, in whatever the intellect has determined to be right action. Firmness of mind under the discipline of the intellect, and mastery over inner and outer circumstances, are the marks of buddhiyoga. Buddhiyoga is the performance of one's determined duties without ever losing sight of life's supreme goal. In light of the Gita's general theme -- the disintegration of personality and its reintegration through the exhaustion of desires -- buddhiyoga can be understood as the seeker's constant effort to live according to the intellect, bringing the mind under the intellect's discipline and acting according to its direction. Through the exhaustion of previously accumulated desires in this way, the ego is destroyed, and that destruction is itself the state of being established in buddhiyoga. Hence Arjuna is here advised to take refuge in the intellect. There is a compelling reason for taking refuge in buddhiyoga: if one continues to act according to the impulses of the mind, countless distractions arise in the mind, and along with them fresh desires accumulate, casting a dense veil over the true Self. The Lord calls such people 'kripana' (pitiable, miserly) -- and indeed they are truly wretched. In contrast, one established in buddhiyoga, acting selflessly, destroys the veil of desires and, with a purified mind, directly experiences the true nature of the Self. Now learn what fruit is obtained by one who performs duty while remaining even-minded.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O Dhananjaya !  The inferior action stays away at a distance due to Yoga of (one's contact with)  determining faculty;  in the determining faculty you must seek refuge; wretched are those who constitute the causes for the fruits of action.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Action with attachment is far inferior, O Arjuna, to action done with evenness of mind. Seek refuge in evenness of mind. Miserable are they who act with a motive for results.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Dhananjaya, indeed, action is ite inferior to the yoga of wisdom. Take resort to wisdom. Those who thirst for rewards are pitiable.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Since this is so, be established in yoga -- hence it is said: action is far inferior to buddhiyoga, the means characterized by knowledge. 'Dureṇa' means exceedingly. Therefore, seek refuge in buddhi, that is, take your stand in knowledge. Those for whom the fruit (phala) is the motive for action are called 'phalahetavah' (those who act for results).

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
An objection is raised: why should one established in yoga still perform action aimed at knowledge, when action can easily be undertaken even with a desire for its fruit? Anticipating this, the next verse is introduced in praise of action performed with the aforementioned yoga, beginning with 'yat punah.' Inferior action ('avaram karma') means action opposed to connection with the intellect (buddhi). The phrase 'buddhiyukta' indicates the excellence that depends on buddhiyoga. By the presence or absence of connection with the intellect, the text determines what is to be done in terms of the superiority or inferiority of action. To the objection that acting even with desire for fruit is easier, the text answers with the word 'kripana' (pitiable). It further qualifies the inferior action as that of one desiring fruit. Using the actual words of the text, it explains why this is inferior compared to its counterpart. The reason such fruit-motivated action is inferior is that it leads to birth and so on. The conclusion -- that action lacking the intellect of equanimity is inferior to action endowed with it, because the former is a cause of birth -- is then stated. 'Buddhi' here concerning yoga means the intellect of equanimity; another meaning of buddhi is also given, namely the ripening of that equanimous action into purity of intellect, its resultant fruit. The word 'sharanam' (refuge) is explained by taking a synonym to convey the intended sense of fearlessness; alternatively, taking the second interpretation of the accusative rather than the locative, the meaning of the sentence is given as taking refuge in the ultimate truth of knowledge. The reason for taking refuge in such knowledge is then explained, along with the elaboration of 'phalahetutva' (being motivated by fruit) -- concluding that taking refuge in the knowledge of the ultimate truth alone is proper. The pitiable state of those averse to knowledge of the ultimate truth is confirmed by citing the Vedic text: 'He who departs from this world without knowing this Imperishable, O Gargi, is pitiable (kripana).' The qualifiers such as 'asthula' (not gross) refer to this same Imperishable.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Action performed with desire for its fruit is far, indeed exceedingly, inferior to buddhiyoga (equanimity). Therefore, O Dhananjaya, take refuge in the intellect (equanimity), because those who become the cause of seeking fruit are utterly pitiable.

Explanation -- 'Dureṇa hyavaraṃ karma buddhiyogāt': Acting with desire for fruit, compared to buddhiyoga, that is, equanimity, is exceedingly inferior. The reason is that actions themselves arise and perish, and the fruits of those actions are also subject to union and separation. But yoga (equanimity) is eternal; it is never separated from oneself, and it undergoes no change. Hence, compared to equanimity, action performed with desire for fruit is exceedingly inferior. Among all actions, equanimity alone is supreme. Without equanimity, beings merely keep performing actions and, as a consequence, keep being born, dying, and suffering, because without equanimity, action has no power to liberate. Equanimity in action is itself true skill. If there is no equanimity in action, a sense of ego and possessiveness ('I' and 'mine') arises regarding the body, and having such ego-possessiveness regarding the body is itself the mentality of an animal. In the Bhagavatam, Shukadeva tells King Parikshit: 'O King, abandon this animal-like notion that I shall die.' The word 'dureṇa' (by far) conveys that just as light and darkness can never be equal, buddhiyoga and desire-driven action can never be equal either -- the difference between the two is as great as that between day and night, because buddhiyoga leads to the attainment of the Supreme, while desire-driven action leads to repeated birth and death.

'Buddhau śaraṇamanviccha': Take refuge in the intellect (equanimity). To remain constantly established in equanimity is itself taking refuge in it. Only by remaining established in equanimity will you experience your own true nature.

'Kripanah phalahetavah': To become the cause (motive) for the fruit of action is exceedingly inferior. Binding oneself to action, the fruit of action, the materials of action, and the body and other instruments is itself becoming the cause of the fruit of action. Hence the Lord, in the forty-seventh verse, forbade becoming the cause of the fruit of action by saying 'mā karmaphalaheturbhūḥ.' Action and the fruit of action belong to one category, while the eternal Reality that is free from both belongs to an entirely different category. For that eternal Reality to become dependent on the transient fruit of action -- what could be more degrading than that? Connection: having stated in the previous verse the need to take refuge in the intellect, the next verse now states the fruit of taking such refuge.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
All other kinds of action are far inferior to those done with evenness of mind, which consists in the renunciation of the main result and with eanimity towards success or failure in  respect of the secondary results. Between the two kinds of actions, the one with eanimity and the other with attachment, the former associated with eanimity removes all the sufferings of Samsara and leads to release which is the highest object of human existence. The latter type of actions, which is pursued with an eye on results, leads one to Samsara whose character is endless suffering. Thus when an act is being done, take refuge in Buddhi (evenness of mind). Refuge means abode. Live in that Buddhi, is the meaning. 'Miserable are they who act with a motive for results':  it means, 'Those who act with attachment to the results, etc., are miserable, as they will continue in Samsara.'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Durena etc. Due to the contact  (one has) with determining faculty  [one's]  inferior action i.e.,  the action that bears bad fruits and is empty, remains far away [from him].  Therefore seek i.e., pray for a refuge in the determining faculty of that nature, on account of which that determining faculty is gained.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Then again, O Dhananjaya, as against action performed with eanimity of mind for adoring God, karma, action undertaken by one longing for the results; is, hi, indeed; durena, ite, by far; avaram, inferior, very remote; buddhi-yogat, from the yoga of wisdom, from actions undertaken with eanimity of mind, because it (the former) is the cause of birth, death, etc. Since this is so, therefore, saranam anviccha, take resort to, seek shelter; buddhau, under wisdom, which relates to Yoga, or to the Conviction about Reality that arises from its (the former's) maturity and which is the cause of (achieving) fearlessness. The meaning is that you should resort to the knowledge of the supreme Goal, because those who under take inferior actions, phala-hetavah, who thirst for rewards, who are impelled by results; are krpanah, pitiable, according to the Sruti, 'He, O Gargi, who departs from this world without knowing this Immutable, is pitiable' (Br. 3.8.10). [See note under 2.7.-Tr.]

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
An objection: having begun the teaching of yoga, why is it now said that action is inferior to buddhiyoga? This is answered beginning 'itaśca.' 'Yuñjasva' means 'strive.' Since the fruit of action is small compared to the fruit of knowledge (as stated in 'yāvān artha' 2.46), it was said, 'strive for yoga.' Here, a further reason for the same point is given. The compound 'buddhiyogāt' is explained to preclude a mere genitive-tatpurusha reading; the word 'lakṣaṇa' here means 'nature' or 'essential form.' Since action is mentioned together with the goal of human life (puruṣārtha), it is proper to take it as referring specifically to knowledge of that nature -- 'upāyāt' meaning 'the means to the human goal.' Since the word 'dūra' (far) ordinarily denotes spatial distance, how does it apply here? This is explained by 'dūreṇa.' Having stated that action is far more inferior than knowledge, and this now needing demonstration, it is shown that the third line of the verse itself provides this proof, introduced by 'ataḥ.' It is explained as steadfastness in knowledge through practice of its means, i.e., buddhiyoga. To the objection that describing those motivated by fruit as pitiable is unnecessary, it is explained by 'phalam.'

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Action performed without discernment is indeed far inferior to buddhiyoga (the yoga of resolute intellect), for that reason take refuge in, or seek out, the intellect -- meaning seek shelter for the sake of the intellect or in the domain of the intellect. The inferiority of action is shown by the statement that those who make the fruit alone their motive, whose very nature is caused by the fruit, are 'kripana' (pitiable) -- such people remain craving even after obtaining the fruit.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
An objection: is the mere performance of action itself the human goal, such that it must always be performed without fruit -- since, according to the maxim that 'even a dull person does not act without a purpose in view,' it would be better to perform action with desire for its fruit? To this the Lord says: 'buddhiyogāt,' meaning far, i.e., at an extreme distance, from niṣkāma-karma-yoga (desireless action), which is the means to Self-knowledge, inferior, i.e., base action performed with an eye on its fruit, becomes the cause of birth and death. Or, alternatively, all action whatsoever is inferior compared to the yoga of knowledge of the Supreme Self. Because this is so, O Dhananjaya, therefore take refuge in the intellect, i.e., in knowledge of the Supreme Self which removes all misfortune -- meaning, resort to niṣkāma-karma-yoga as your protector, which destroys the obstructing sins. 'Anviccha' means 'desire to do.' But those who are motivated by fruit, desiring results, and perform inferior action, are pitiable -- eternally helpless, revolving in the wheel of birth, death, and so on -- meaning, utterly wretched. This is confirmed by the Vedic text: 'He who departs from this world without knowing this Imperishable, O Gargya, is pitiable.' Thus you too should not become pitiable; rather, you should practice niṣkāma-karma-yoga, which produces Self-knowledge that removes all misfortune -- this is the import. Just as pitiable (miserly) people, earning wealth through great hardship, cheat themselves out of the great happiness that comes from charity and the like, being tempted by the mere sight of small pleasures, so too those who perform actions with great hardship, tempted by trifling fruits, cheat themselves of the experience of supreme bliss -- this is the misfortune and folly conveyed by the word 'kripana' (pitiable).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Action performed with desire is extremely inferior -- this is stated beginning 'dūreṇa.' Buddhiyoga is the performance of action through the determinative faculty of the intellect, or it is itself the means to (right) intellect. Compared to that, any other action performed with desire is far, that is, exceedingly, inferior. Since this is so, therefore take refuge in, i.e., practice, karmayoga which rests in knowledge (buddhi). Alternatively, 'buddhau śaraṇam' may mean 'take refuge in Ishvara, the protector, through the intellect.' Those who act with desire for fruit are pitiable, wretched. This is confirmed by the Vedic text: 'He who departs from this world without knowing this Imperishable, O Gargya, is pitiable.'

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Action performed with desire is extremely inferior -- this is stated beginning 'dūreṇa.' Action performed at a distance, that is, with an eye on inferior fruit, is inferior compared to buddhiyoga -- action endowed with the intellect of equanimity, undertaken for the worship of Ishvara -- because it is a cause of birth and so on; or, alternatively, it is inferior compared to the yoga characterized by equanimity, which is itself the means to knowledge of the Self. For this very reason, take refuge in, that is, resort to and pray for, the intellect of equanimity, or the intellect of discrimination (Sankhya-buddhi), which is either directly or through succession the cause of attaining fearlessness. May you become one who has taken refuge -- this is the meaning. The alternative meaning, 'take refuge in Ishvara, the protector, through the intellect,' was not shown by the commentators because it involves supplying an unstated qualifier and departing from the intended topic. For this reason, those who perform inferior action are pitiable, because they are motivated by fruit, that is, driven by craving for fruit. This is confirmed by the Vedic text: 'He who departs from this world without knowing this Imperishable, O Gargya, is pitiable.' By addressing Arjuna as 'Dhananjaya' (winner of wealth), the Lord suggests: the wealth you won was used by Yudhishthira to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice out of desire for sovereignty, the fruit of which you all have already experienced before and are experiencing again now -- hence desire-motivated action is exceedingly base.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
An objection: if this is so, then why should not everyone engage in this (buddhiyoga)? Anticipating this, the Lord says: action performed far from buddhiyoga -- that is, from My own glory in the form of the intellect suited for action -- is action done for the sake of fruit and the like, not as an expression of obedience to My command; hence it is inferior. This meaning is confirmed by the word 'hi.' Action performed with desire for fruit, apart from obedience to the Lord's command, is indeed base. Therefore, such inferior action is fit only for ordinary, unrefined people, not for the elevated souls who are My own parts (amsha) -- this is conveyed by addressing Arjuna as 'Dhananjaya.' Hence it is implied that not everyone is qualified for this, since ordinary people lack this eligibility. Since such people are base, and those without eligibility for sattvic disposition do not engage in it, but you, being My own part, are fit for buddhiyoga, therefore strive for buddhiyoga -- this is conveyed by 'buddhau.' Take refuge in, that is, resort to, Ishvara, who is the cause of buddhiyoga. An objection: even those who act with desire seek refuge in Ishvara, so what is the difference here? Anticipating this, the Lord says 'kripana' (pitiable) -- those motivated by fruit are desirous, greedy, and pitiable, that is, wretched. For I am never attained by the greedy. This is why the scripture establishes that only one who has become Brahman attains Brahman: 'Being Brahman himself, he attains Brahman' (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4.6).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
This same buddhiyoga is being praised, beginning 'dūreṇa.' Action performed with desire for its fruit is, indeed, notoriously far, i.e., exceedingly inferior, compared to the desireless action described earlier as buddhiyoga. Therefore, take refuge in, that is, seek and pray to, Ishvara -- the protector or resort connected with buddhi, whether in the form of yoga or, as its resultant fruit, in the form of Sankhya (discriminative knowledge) -- and perform actions for His pleasure. This is the meaning. Because those who are motivated by fruit, that is, for whom the fruit alone is the motive and driving force, are craving for fruit and thus pitiable, wretched. This is confirmed by the Vedic text: 'He who departs from this world without knowing this Imperishable, O Gargya, is pitiable.'

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O Dhanañjaya, keep all abominable activities far distant by devotional service, and in that consciousness surrender unto the Lord. Those who want to enjoy the fruits of their work are misers.

 One who has actually come to understand one’s constitutional position as an eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save working in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means transcendental loving service to the Lord. Such devotional service is the right course of action for the living entity. Only misers desire to enjoy the fruit of their own work just to be further entangled in material bondage. Except for work in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all activities are abominable because they continually bind the worker to the cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to be the cause of work. Everything should be done in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa. Misers do not know how to utilize the assets of riches which they acquire by good fortune or by hard labor. One should spend all energies working in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and that will make one’s life successful. Like misers, unfortunate persons do not employ their human energy in the service of the Lord.