Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
mūḍhagrāheṇātmano yatpīḍayā kriyate tapaḥ .
parasyotsādanārthaṃ vā tattāmasamudāhṛtam

Word Meanings:
मूढग्राहेण - out of a foolish
आत्मनः - of the self
यत् - which
पीडया - with torture
क्रियते - is practised
तपः - austerity
परस्य - of another
उत्सादनार्थम् - for causing destruction to others
वा - or
तत् - that
तामसम् - Tamasic
उदाहृतम् - is declared.

Life Application:
Austerity practiced out of foolish notion, with self-torture, or to ruin another—called Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
That austerity which is practiced out of a foolish notion, with self-torture, or for the purpose of destroying another, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
That austerity which is practised out of a foolish notion, with self-torture, or for the purpose of destroying another, is declared to be Tamasic.

मूढग्राहेण out of a foolish notion? आत्मनः of the self? यत् which? पीडया with torture? क्रियते is practised? तपः austerity? परस्य of another? उत्सादनार्थम् for the purpose of destroying? वा or? तत् that? तामसम् Tamasic? उदाहृतम् is declared.Commentary Some burn sulphur in a pot and place it on their head. Some thrust hooks of iron into their flesh. Some hang themselves with their head downwards over fire and swallow smoke. Some stand in cold water immersed up to the neck. Some torture the body by lighting fires on the four sides (with the sun as the fifth fire -- this is known as the Panchagni Tapas). Some sit in the centre of a circle of fire. Such austerities are Tamasic. These will not help one to attain knowledge of the Self.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Austerity done under delusion, and accompanied with sorcery or torture to oneself or another, may be assumed to spring from Ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
That austerity which is undertaken with a foolish intent (mudha-grahena), by causing pain to oneself, or for the destruction of others, is said to be born of Tamas. A seeker must understand the true purpose of austerity, which is self-integration, not self-destruction or hurting others.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
What austerity is practised with foolish obstinacy  [and] with self-torture only in order to destroy other person-that is declared to be of the Tamas.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That austerity which is practised from deluded notions by means of self-torture or in order to injure another is said to be Tamasika.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
That austerity which is undertaken with a foolish intent, by causing pain to oneself, or for the destruction of others-that is said to be born of tamas.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that Tamasic austerity is performed with extreme ignorance (aviveka). It involves obstinacy, self-torture of the body, or performance of rituals for the destruction of another.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
That austerity which is practiced out of a foolish notion, with self-torture, or for the purpose of destroying another, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'mudha-grahena' means foolish obstinacy where people torture their own body and mind, mistakenly believing it to be austerity. Alternatively, they perform severe acts (like fasting or exposing themselves to extreme weather) to gain powers to destroy or harm others. This self-inflicted pain aimed at harming others is the hallmark of Tamas.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Deluded persons are those who lack correct understanding. That austerity which is practised from deluded notion, viz., from the obstinate determination by deluded persons, by self-torture regardless of one's own capacity or which is performed for causing sufferings to others - that is said to be Tamasika.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sraddhaya etc. upto tamasam udahrtam.  There is faith in all the three-fold austerity.  the faith of a man of the Sattva is full of austerity itself.  The faith of a man of the Rajas is in the Rajas i.e, showing  (or hyprocricy) etc.  But, the faith (or desire) of a man well established in the Tamas  is merely in ruining others.  Thus the sage speaks of all the three-fold austerity practised with faith.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yat, that; tapah, austerity; which is kriyate, under-taken; mudha-grahena, with a foolish intent, with a conviction arising out of non-discriminating; pidaya, causing pain; atmanah, to oneself (to one's body etc.); va, or; utsadanartham, for the destruction; parasya, of another; tat, that; is udahrtam, said to be; an austerity tamasam, born of tamas.
Now the classification of charity is being spoken of:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that Tamasic austerity is performed with foolish obstinacy, causing self-torture to the body and senses, or performed to destroy or injure others through black magic or sorcery.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that Tamasic austerity is performed out of a deluded obstinacy, causing physical torture to oneself or for the destruction of another (such as black magic).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that Tamasic austerity is undertaken with a deluded obstinacy to outdo others, causing self-inflicted pain or designed to destroy one's enemies by gaining powers.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'mudha-grahena' means acting out of delusion and not considering one's capacity. Torturing one's body against scriptural commands or to cause injury to others is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that Tamasic austerity is undertaken out of foolish obstinacy, causing pain to one's own soul and body, or to destroy others. It is completely improper and produces no spiritual benefit.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'utsadanartham' means for destruction. Tamasic austerity is undertaken with a deluded obstinacy to cause self-torture or the destruction of others.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Penance performed out of foolishness, with self-torture or to destroy or injure others, is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

 There are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like Hiraṇyakaśipu, who performed austere penances to become immortal and kill the demigods. He prayed to Brahmā for such things, but ultimately he was killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To undergo penances for something which is impossible is certainly in the mode of ignorance.