Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
kaccidetacchrutaṃ pārtha tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā .
kaccidajñānasammohaḥ pranaṣṭaste dhanañjaya

Word Meanings:
कच्चित् - whether
एतत् - this
श्रुतम् - heard
पार्थ - O son of Kunti
त्वया - by thee
एकाग्रेण - with single-pointed mind
चेतसा - by mind
कच्चित् - whether
अज्ञानसंमोहः - the delusion of ignorance
प्रनष्टः - has been destroyed
ते - thy
धनञ्जय - O Dhananjaya.

Life Application:
Has this been heard by you with single-pointed mind, O Partha? Has your delusion born of ignorance been destroyed?

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Has this been heard by you, O Arjuna, with an attentive mind? Has your delusion, born of ignorance, been destroyed, O Dhananjaya?

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Has this been heard, O Arjuna, with one-pointed mind? Has the delusion of thy ignorance been destroyed, O Dhananjaya?

कच्चित् whether? एतत् this? श्रुतम् heard? पार्थ O son of Kunti (Arjuna)? त्वया by thee? एकाग्रेण onepointed? चेतसा by mind? कच्चित् whether? अज्ञानसंमोहः the delusion of ignorance? प्रनष्टः has been destroyed? ते thy? धनञ्जय O Dhananjaya.Commentary It is the duty of the spiritual teacher or preceptor to make the aspirant understand the teaching of the scripture and to enable him to attain the goal of life (Moksha). If the student has not grasped the subject he will have to explain it in some other way with similes? analogies and illustrations. That is the reason why Lord Krishna asks Arjuna Has the delusion of thy ignorance been destroyedThis What I have told thee.Have you heard it? O Arjuna? with onepointed mind Have you grasped My teachingDelusion of ignorance The absence of discrimination which is caused by ignorance and which is natural. The destruction of delusion is the aim of all this endeavour on your part to hear the scripture and the exertion on My part as the teacher.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
O Arjuna! Hast thou listened attentively to My words? Has thy ignorance and thy delusion gone?

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Here, Lord Krishna, the teacher of the Gita, asks Arjuna a question to know how much he has benefited from the teaching. Although the Lord had no doubt about the efficacy of His teachings, like a successful physician, He wanted to hear the news of recovery directly from the happy face of Arjuna, who was suffering from the disease of worldly attachment. 'Did you listen to My teaching with an attentive mind?' This question itself subtly shows that the knowledge of Truth destroys the delusion of ignorance, along with all erroneous ideas. The knowledge of Truth manifests as efficiency in action, and its perfection lies in the service of society. If Arjuna has understood the Lord's teaching, he will not hesitate to face the challenge. This is the unuttered intent of the Lord. Now, Arjuna answers the Lord's question.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O son of Prtha !  Has this been heared by you with attentive mind ? O Dhananjaya !  Has your strong delusion, born of ignorance, been totally destroyed ?

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Have you heard this, O Arjuna, with one-pointed mind?  Has your delusion, caused by ignorance, been dispelled?

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Partha, has this been listened to by you with a one-pointed mind? O Dhananjaya, has your delusion caused by ignorance been destroyed?

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Has this been heard by you, O Arjuna, with an attentive mind? Has your delusion, born of ignorance, been destroyed, O Dhananjaya? The teacher enquires to ensure the disciple is fully freed from ignorance and ready to act.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Has this been heard by you, O Arjuna, with an attentive mind? Has your delusion, born of ignorance, been destroyed, O Dhananjaya? Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas highlights the teacher's care for the student: 1. Heard with an attentive mind (tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā): The Lord asks if Arjuna listened with full concentration, because without concentration, even a great teaching cannot bear fruit. 2. Has delusion been destroyed (kaccidajñānasammohaḥ pranaṣṭaḥ): The Lord asks if the delusion (born of body-identification and attachment) has been completely routed. 3. The names Parth and Dhananjaya: Lord uses these names to remind him of his lineage and his valor, indicating that he is qualified to receive and act upon this supreme wisdom.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
O Arjuna, have you heard attentively all that I have taught?  Has your delusion caused by ignorance, been dispelled - that ignorance deluded by which you said, 'I shall not fight'?

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Ya idam etc. upto Dhananjaya. The very act of explaining this among My devotees is itself an act of cultivating devotion towards Me.  Whosoever shall declare etc :  Whosoever directs the mind [of the devotees] by face to face method, following the best procedure prescribed in the scriptures; i.e., he who shall impart  [this knowledge] - he becomes one with Me.  This is an injunction  [concerning the result]  and not a sentence of praise.  Likewise is  [the case] in other places also.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O Partha, kaccit etat, has this that has been said by Me; been srutam, listened to, grasped through hearing; ekagrena, with a none-pointed; cetasa, mind? Or have you been inattentive? O Dhananjaya, kaccit, has; te, your; ajnana-sammohah, delusion caused by ignorance, bewilderment, natural indiscrimination; been pranastah, destroyed, for which purpose has there been this effort on your part for hearing the Scripture, and on My part, the effort of being a teacher?

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Lord alerts Arjuna with a question: 'kaccid...'. He asks if his delusion born of ignorance is destroyed.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The Lord asks this to show the teacher's duty of striving until the disciple gains knowledge: 'kaccid...'. He asks: 'O Partha, did you listen to this Gita scripture with a one-pointed mind? Is your delusion, born of ignorance, destroyed? If not, I shall instruct you again.'

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
With the intention of instructing again if correct understanding has not arisen, the Lord asks: 'kaccid...'. The delusion is the misconception born of ignorance of the Truth. The rest is clear.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
To show the teacher's duty to make the disciple successful, the Lord asks: O Partha, did you hear this with an attentive mind? Has your delusion born of ignorance been destroyed? If you did not hear or understand, I must speak again until you, My beloved, comprehend it.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Even though the Lord knew Arjuna's heart, He asks with affection to ensure the success of His teaching and prevent forgetfulness. He asks if his delusion—the erroneous knowledge born of ignorance—is destroyed.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The Lord explains the fruit of the listener who hears when another is reciting: 'sraddhavan...'. The man who listens with faith and without envy (not thinking that the reader is reciting loudly for show or deceit) shall be liberated from Samsara and reach the happy worlds of the righteous.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Though the Lord is all-knowing and dwells in all hearts, He asks to instruct the world on the relationship between teacher and disciple. Delusion is twofold: mistaking the non-self for the self, and mistaking one's own duty (fighting) for adharma. The Lord asks if both these delusions have been destroyed.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O son of Pṛthā, O conqueror of wealth, have you heard this with an attentive mind? And are your ignorance and illusions now dispelled?

 The Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was His duty to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the whole Bhagavad-gītā in its proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready to re-explain any point, or the whole Bhagavad-gītā if so required. Actually, anyone who hears Bhagavad-gītā from a bona fide spiritual master like Kṛṣṇa or His representative will find that all his ignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gītā is not an ordinary book written by a poet or fiction writer; it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Any person fortunate enough to hear these teachings from Kṛṣṇa or from His bona fide spiritual representative is sure to become a liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.