Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
yudhāmanyuśca vikrānta uttamaujāśca vīryavān .
saubhadro draupadeyāśca sarva eva mahārathāḥ

Word Meanings:
युधामन्युः - Yudhamanyu
च - and
विक्रान्तः - courageous
उत्तमौजाः - Uttamauja
च - and
वीर्यवान् - brave
सौभद्रः - son of Subhadra (Abhimanyu)
द्रौपदेयाः - sons of Draupadi
च - and
सर्व - all
एव - indeed
महारथाः - great chariot warriors

Life Application:
Focus on collective group strength rather than relying solely on individual talent when tackling complex responsibilities.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The valiant Yudhamanyu, the strong Uttamaujas, the son of Subhadra (Abhimanyu), and the sons of Draupadi -- all these are maharathas (great chariot-warriors).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
"The strong Yodhamanyu and the brave Uttamaujas, the son
of Subhadra (Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra and Arjuna), and the sons of
Draupadi, all of great chariots (great heroes).

युधामन्युः Yudhamanyu? च and? विक्रान्तः the strong? उत्तमौजाः Uttamaujas? च and? वीर्यवान् the brave? सौभद्रः the son of Subhadra? द्रौपदेयाः the sons of Draupadi? च and? सर्वे all? एव even? महारथाः great carwarriors.No Commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja, Soubhadra and the sons of Droupadi, famous men.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In these three verses is a roll-call of the chief and renowned warriors of the Pandava army. While surveying the Pandava army, Duryodhana recognizes many maharathas among them. In the ancient Hindu armies, the leader of a group of 11,000 archer-soldiers was called a maharatha. Arjuna and Bhima were warriors renowned in their time for archery and strength. Duryodhana says that all these maharathas are equal to Arjuna and Bhima, the purport being that, although the Pandava army was smaller in number, in capability it exceeded the well-equipped and vast army of the Kauravas.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
And Yudhamanyu,  the heroic,  and Uttamaujas,  the valourous,  the son of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadiall are indeed mighty warriors.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Yudhamanyu the valiant, and Uttamaujas the strong; and also the son of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi, all mighty warriors.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And the chivalrous Yudhamanyu, and the valiant Uttamaujas; son of Subhadra (Abhimanyu) and the sons of Draupadi  all (of whom) are, verily, maharathas.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Intending to state again that all of them, because they possess great strength and prowess, are not to be disregarded, he says 'sarva eva' (all, indeed).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Here (in the Pandava army) there are great heroes with very large bows, who in battle are equal to Bhima and Arjuna. Among them are Yuyudhana (Satyaki), King Virata, and the maharatha Drupada. There are also Dhrishtaketu and Chekitana, and the valiant king of Kashi. There are also the two brothers Purujit and Kuntibhoja, and Shaibya, foremost among men. There are also the valiant Yudhamanyu and the valiant Uttamaujas. There are also Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra, and the five sons of Draupadi. All of these are maharathas (great chariot-warriors).

1.6 Commentary -- 'atra shura maheshvasa bhimarjunasama yudhi': That by which arrows are shot or flung is called 'ishvasa,' i.e., a bow. Those who possess such great bows are all 'maheshvasa.' The point is that great strength is required to fix arrows on large bows and to draw the bowstring; an arrow released after being drawn forcefully strikes with special force. Because they possess such great bows, they are all very strong and heroic. They are no ordinary warriors. In battle they are equal to Bhima and Arjuna -- that is, in strength they are like Bhima, and in the art of weaponry they are like Arjuna.

'yuyudhanah': Yuyudhana (Satyaki) had learned the science of weapons from Arjuna. Therefore, even though Bhagavan Sri Krishna gave the Narayani army to Duryodhana, Satyaki, out of gratitude, remained on Arjuna's side and did not go over to Duryodhana. To create in Dronacharya's mind a feeling of hostility toward Arjuna, Duryodhana, among the maharathas, first names Arjuna's disciple Yuyudhana. The purport is: 'Just look at this Arjuna! He learned to wield weapons from you yourself, and you even granted Arjuna the boon that you would strive so that there be no archer in the world equal to him. Thus you bore such affection for your disciple Arjuna, yet he, being ungrateful, stands ready to fight against you, while Arjuna's own disciple stands on his side.'
[Yuyudhana did not die in the Mahabharata war but was killed in the internecine war among the Yadavas.]

'viratashcha': The King Virata on whose account our hero Susharma was humiliated, on whose account you had to be bewildered by the sammohana weapon, and on whose account we too had to flee the battle leaving his cattle -- that King Virata stands on your opposing side. Dronacharya had no such enmity or hostility toward King Virata; but Duryodhana reckons that if, after Yuyudhana, he were to name Drupada, then the thought might arise in Dronacharya's mind that Duryodhana is inciting him against the Pandavas and specially urging him to fight, and is trying to create hostility toward the Pandavas in his mind. Therefore Duryodhana names Virata before Drupada, so that Dronacharya may not perceive his cunning and may fight with special effort.
[King Virata, along with his three sons Uttara, Shveta and Shankha, was killed in the Mahabharata war.]

'drupadashcha maharathah': You reminded Drupada of your former friendship, but he insulted you in the assembly by saying, 'I am a king and you are a beggar; so what friendship can there be between you and me?' And out of enmity he even begot a son to kill you. That same maharatha Drupada stands on the opposing side to fight against you.
[King Drupada was killed in the war at the hands of Dronacharya.]

'dhrishtaketuh': How foolish is this Dhrishtaketu, that he stands ready to fight on the side of the very Krishna who, in the full assembly, killed his father Shishupala with the discus!
[Dhrishtaketu was killed at the hands of Dronacharya.]

'chekitanah': The entire Yadava army is ready to fight on our side, yet this Yadava, Chekitana, stands in the Pandava army!
[Chekitana was killed at the hands of Duryodhana.]

'kashirajashcha viryavan': This king of Kashi is very heroic and a maharatha. He too stands in the Pandava army. Therefore fight with vigilance, for he is very valiant.
[The king of Kashi was killed in the Mahabharata war.]

'purujitkuntibhojashcha': Although Purujit and Kuntibhoja, being brothers of Kunti, are maternal uncles to both us and the Pandavas, yet, because of the partiality in their minds, they stand ready to fight against us on the opposing side.
[Both Purujit and Kuntibhoja were killed in the war at the hands of Dronacharya.]

'shaibyashcha narapungavah': This Shaibya is the father-in-law of Yudhishthira. He is foremost among men and very strong. Through family ties he too is our relative, yet he stands on the Pandavas' side.

'yudhamanyushcha vikranta uttamaujashcha viryavan': Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, very strong and heroic warriors of the Panchala country, have been appointed to guard the wheels of the chariot of my foe Arjuna. Keep an eye on them too.
[Ashvatthama killed these two while they slept at night.]

'saubhadrah': This is Abhimanyu, the son of Krishna's sister Subhadra. He is very heroic. He learned the art of breaking the chakravyuha (wheel-array) while still in the womb. So at the time of forming the chakravyuha, be mindful of him.
[In the war Abhimanyu was killed when Duhshasana's son unjustly struck him on the head with a mace.]

'draupadeyashcha': From the five -- Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva -- were born from Draupadi's womb, respectively, Prativindhya, Sutasoma, Shrutakarma, Shatanika and Shrutasena. Behold these five. Draupadi, by mocking me in the full assembly, scorched my heart; by killing her five sons in battle, avenge that upon her.
[Ashvatthama killed these five while they slept at night.]

'sarva eva maharathah': All of these are maharathas. He who is proficient in both the science and the practice of arms, and who alone in battle can direct ten thousand archer-warriors at once, is called a maharatha. Many such maharathas stand in the Pandava army.
Connection -- To create hostility toward the Pandavas in Dronacharya's mind and to rouse his zeal for battle, Duryodhana described the excellence of the Pandava army. Then the thought arose in Duryodhana's mind that Dronacharya is, after all, partial to the Pandavas, so on hearing of the greatness of the Pandava army he might tell me, 'Since there is such excellence in the Pandava army, why do you not make peace with them?' As soon as this thought came, Duryodhana, in the next three verses, describes the excellence of his own army.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Dhrtarastra said - Sanjaya said  Duryodhana, after viewing the forces of Pandavas protected by Bhima, and his own forces protected by Bhisma conveyed his views thus to Drona, his teacher, about the adeacy of Bhima's forces for conering the Kaurava forces and the inadeacy of his own forces for victory against the Pandava forces. He was grief-stricken within.

Observing his (Duryodhana's) despondecny, Bhisma, in order to cheer him, roared like a lion, and then blowing his conch, made his side sound their conchs and kettle-drums, which made an uproar as a sign of victory. Then, having heard that great tumult, Arjuna and Sri Krsna the Lord of all lords, who was acting as the charioteer of Arjuna, sitting in their great chariot which was powerful enough to coner the three worlds; blew their divine conchs Srimad Pancajanya and Devadatta. Then, both Yudhisthira and Bhima blew their respective conchs separately. That tumult rent asunder the hearts of your sons, led by Duryodhana. The sons of Dhrtarastra then thought, 'Our cause is almost lost now itself.' So said Sanjaya to Dhrtarastra who was longing for their victory.

Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra:  Then, seeing the Kauravas, who were ready for battle, Arjuna, who had Hanuman, noted for his exploit of burning Lanka, as the emblem on his flag on his chariot, directed his charioteer Sri Krsna, the Supreme Lord-who is overcome by parental love for those who take shelter in Him who is the treasure-house of knowledge, power, lordship, energy, potency and splendour, whose sportive delight brings about the origin, sustentation and dissolution of the entire cosmos at His will, who is the Lord of the senses, who controls in all ways the senses inner and outer of all, superior and inferior - by saying, 'Station my chariot in an appropriate place in order that I may see exactly my enemies who are eager for battle.'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Why this exhaustive counting? The reality of things is this:

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Duryodhana too, beholding the army of the Pandavas guarded by Vrikodara (Bhima) and others, and his own army guarded by Bhishma and others, and perceiving the adequacy of that (Pandava) force for his own defeat and the inadequacy of his own force for defeating it, after reporting to his teacher, became dejected within himself.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'But if any warrior of ours can conquer this army, marshalled by the single, undistinguished son of Drupada, why then do you grow so distressed?' -- anticipating this, he speaks the three verses beginning 'atra shura.' Here Dhrishtadyumna is not the only hero, such that the army might be disregarded; rather, in this army there are many other heroes as well, so one must certainly strive for its conquest -- that is the intent. He qualifies the heroes with 'maheshvasa': the bow is 'ishvasa'; those whose bows are great and unassailable by others are 'maheshvasa.' In battle (yudhi) they are equal -- comparable -- to Bhima and Arjuna, whose prowess is universally acknowledged. He states them with 'yuyudhana' etc. up to 'maharatha.' Yuyudhana is Satyaki. And 'Drupada, the maharatha' -- taking 'maharatha' as qualifying one (Drupada) alone. Or else, 'maharatha' is the epithet of Yuyudhana, Virata and Drupada; 'viryavan' (valiant) the epithet of Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana and the king of Kashi; 'narapungava' (bull among men) the epithet of Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Shaibya. 'The valiant Yudhamanyu and the valiant Uttamaujas' -- these two. Or else, gathering all the epithets, they may be applied everywhere (to all). 'Saubhadra' is Abhimanyu. 'The sons of Draupadi' are her five sons (Prativindhya and the rest). By the word 'cha' (and), others too -- the Pandya king, Ghatotkacha and the like -- are included. The five Pandavas, being very well known, are not counted. Those who are counted, seventeen others of theirs, are all maharathas -- every one a maharatha, not a single one a mere ratha or half-ratha (ardharatha). 'Maharatha' is also an indication of the status of atiratha. Their definition is: 'He who can fight alone with ten thousand archers, and is proficient in weapons and their science, is remembered as a maharatha. He who can fight with unlimited foes is called an atiratha. He who fights with only one on his chariot, being inferior to that, is remembered as an ardharatha.'

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
'yudhamanyushcha' etc. Vikranta (the valiant) is one warrior named Yudhamanyu. Saubhadra is Abhimanyu. The Draupadeyas are the five sons born to Draupadi from the five (Yudhishthira and the rest) -- Prativindhya and the others. The definition of maharatha and the rest: 'He who can fight alone with ten thousand archers and is proficient in weapons and their science is remembered as a maharatha. He who can fight with unlimited foes is called an atiratha. The chariot-warrior who fights with only one, being inferior to that, is considered an ardharathi.'

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Saubhadra is Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra. The Draupadeyas are the five sons of Draupadi -- Prativindhya and the rest. Anticipating the objection that saying 'Drupada too is a maharatha' is improper, since there are also other maharathas mentioned by Bhishma, he concedes it with 'sarva eva' (all indeed). Those named and those included by the word 'cha' (and) are all maharathas. Its definition is: 'He who can fight alone with ten thousand archers and is proficient in weapons and their science is called a maharatha. He who can fight with unlimited foes is called an atiratha. The chariot-warrior who fights with only one, being inferior to that, is remembered as an ardharatha.' Although there are atirathas and the like on the opposing side too, still their suppression -- that is, the capacity to check the maharathas -- belongs to an atiratha like you and not to the other atirathas and so on: this is said to generate enthusiasm in the teacher. Every one of them is a maharatha, not a single one a mere ratha or ardharatha. 'Maharatha' is also an indication of atiratha -- so say some.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Thus, intending to give directly the answer 'yatra yogeśvaraḥ' (18.78) to the question that was asked out of a desire to know Suyodhana's (Duryodhana's) victory, Sanjaya — in order to make that answer credible — narrated all the intervening events as well: 'dṛṣṭvā.' 'Having seen the arrayed army of the Pandavas' is the cause of Suyodhana's loss of courage. The particular state consisting in that loss of courage, dependent upon it, is indicated by the word 'tu.' The unexpressed portion from 'dṛṣṭvā' up to 'anunādayan' is made explicit by the passage from 'duryodhana' up to 'akathayat' (Ramanuja-bhashya 1.19). 'saṃjñārtham' means 'for the sake of right knowledge,' or 'for the sake of enumeration by name or number.' There, the portion up to 'antarviṣaṇṇo'bhavat' — that is, ending with 'bhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi' (1.11) — has been explained. The meaning of the verse 'aparyāptam' (1.10) is this: 'tat' — therefore — 'our army guarded by Bhishma is aparyāptam (insufficient), not adequate to conquer the enemy's army; but this army of these Pandavas, guarded by Bhima, is paryāptam (sufficient), adequate to conquer our army.'
But this is untenable, since it would break the apprehended co-referentiality (sāmānādhikaraṇya) in 'tat balam,' and since earlier no cause was adduced for the capability or incapability of the enemy's army and one's own. Nor does he regard his own army, guarded by Bhishma, Drona and others, as incapable; for the slaying of the very powerful Bhishma, Drona and the rest is conditional. And in passages such as 'na bhetavyaṁ mahārāja' (Mahabharata, Udyoga 55.1), the capability of his own army is set forth by Duryodhana many times over. Nor is there now any ground for the contrary notion. Moreover, at the beginning of the second day Duryodhana will say: 'aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ balaṁ pārthābhirakṣitam, paryāptaṁ tv idam eteṣāṁ balaṁ pārthivasattamāḥ' (MBh, Udyoga). There the construction is simply 'asmākam aparyāptam,' not again 'asmākaṁ balam.' Therefore here too the same mode of expression is fitting. Hence the construal should be effected by a variant reading (pāṭhabheda), by remote construction (vyavahita-anvaya), by splitting the sentence (vākyabheda), or by a difference in word-meaning (padārthabheda).
Among these: the variant reading arises by transposing the words 'bhīma' and 'bhīṣma.' Thus, in the construction 'that army of ours, guarded by Bhima, is aparyāptam,' co-referentiality, the naturalness of the remote reference by 'tat,' and non-contradiction with Duryodhana's intent are all established. In remote construction too this same meaning holds; and here remote construction is possible in two ways — one by transposing 'bhīmābhirakṣita' and 'bhīṣmābhirakṣita,' the second by transposing 'aparyāptaṁ tat' and 'paryāptaṁ tv idam.' Merely the interval of separation is tolerated for the sake of appropriateness of meaning.
In splitting the sentence, the construal is thus: 'aparyāptaṁ tat' is one assertion, and 'paryāptaṁ tv idam' is a second. To the doubt 'what is the reason here?', the two sentences serve to supply the reason: 'our army is guarded by Bhishma,' 'their army is guarded by Bhima' — meaning, because our army is presided over by the strong and the enemy's by the weak.
In difference of word-meaning, the construal is thus: 'paryāptam' means 'paryāpana,' completion; 'paryāpta' is a kṛt formation in the agentive sense, meaning 'capable of destroying'; 'aparyāptam' means 'incapable of destroying.' 'This army of ours, guarded by Bhishma — tat — is aparyāptam, unable to destroy the enemy.' Here 'tat' designates the Pandava army as agent, and 'idam' designates one's own army as the agent that finishes off the enemy army. And because of the connection with the past-participle (niṣṭhā), the genitive in the objective sense is not obtained. Or else, 'aparyāptam' means 'unlimited (aparimita)' and 'paryāptam' means 'limited (parimita),' since one's own army is furnished with eleven akshauhinis and the enemy's with seven.
In any case, at the very outset of the war Duryodhana would surely not adduce the weakness of his own army and the strength of the enemy's — that would be like leaving the highway to enter a thief's hut. To explain: here, over against 'guarded by Bhishma,' with what intent is 'guarded by Bhima' pointed out? Not by way of Bhima's generalship like Bhishma's, since Dhrishtadyumna has been declared the commander of that (Pandava army). Nor by way of valour equal to Bhishma's, since Bhima is well known to be greatly unequal to him — as Bhishma himself said: 'Were not Vishnu, the primal Person, their protector, I am able with a single bow to slay all the Pandavas' (MBh). Nor by way of being lord of the opposing army, since the son of Dharma (Yudhishthira) is that. Nor by way of being the foremost warrior of the enemy army, since Arjuna alone is so renowned. Therefore, because Bhima is consecrated to the slaying of all the sons of Dhritarashtra and is endowed with the daring, strength, allies and the like suited to that end, he is specially mentioned. This being so, the mention of Bhishma as set over against him is likewise because Bhishma is understood to be devoted to protecting all the sons of Pandu. Hence it is said that by these two words (Bhima and Bhishma) the excessive apprehension of fear — regarding the enemy and regarding the ally — is indicated. As for what was stated earlier concerning the cause of the capability and incapability of the enemy's army and one's own...

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
'Vikranta' means exceedingly valiant. 'Viryavan' is an epithet of Saubhadra (Abhimanyu). The Draupadeyas are the five -- Prativindhya and the rest. All of them are maharathas. And the definition of a maharatha: 'He who can fight alone with ten thousand archers and is proficient in weapons and their science is remembered as a maharatha,' and so forth.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, Saubhadra (Abhimanyu), and the five Draupadeyas (Prativindhya and the rest) -- thus eight. By the word 'cha' (and), the very renowned Pandavas and Ghatotkacha and others should also be included. Every one of them is a maharatha. Its definition: 'He who can fight alone with ten thousand archers and is proficient in weapons and their science is called a maharatha. He who can fight with unlimited foes is called an atiratha. He who fights alone on a chariot, being inferior to that, is remembered as an ardharatha.'

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
There are the mighty Yudhāmanyu, the very powerful Uttamaujā, the son of Subhadrā and the sons of Draupadī. All these warriors are great chariot fighters.

There is no purport for this verse