Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śrībhagavānuvāca .
paraṃ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi jñānānāṃ jñānamuttamam .
yajjñātvā munayaḥ sarve parāṃ siddhimito gatāḥ

Word Meanings:
परम् - supreme
भूयः - again
प्रवक्ष्यामि - will declare
ज्ञानानाम् - of all knowledge
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
उत्तमम् - the best
यत् - which
ज्ञात्वा - having known
मुनयः - the sages
सर्वे - all
पराम् - supreme
सिद्धिम् - to perfection
इतः - after this life
गताः - gone.

Life Application:
Listen to the supreme knowledge, the best of all wisdom, having known which all sages attained supreme perfection.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Sri Bhagavan said: I will again declare that supreme knowledge, the best of all knowledges, knowing which all the sages have attained the supreme perfection after this life.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Blessed Lord said  I will again declare (to thee) that supreme knowledge, the best of all knowledge, having known which all the sages have gone to the supreme perfection after this life.

परम् supreme? भूयः again? प्रवक्ष्यामि (I) will declare? ज्ञानानाम् of all knowledge? ज्ञानम् knowledge? उत्तमम् the best? यत् which? ज्ञात्वा having known? मुनयः the sages? सर्वे all? पराम् supreme? सिद्धिम् to perfection? इतः after this life? गताः gone.Commentary Further analysis of the field is made in this chapter.In chapter XIII? verse 21? it has been stated that attachment to the alities is the cause of Samsara or births in good and evil wombs. In this chapter the Lord gives answers to the estions What are the alities of Nature (Gunas) How do they bind a man What are the characteristics of these alities How do they operate How can one obtain freedom from them What are the characteristics of a liberated soulAll knowledge has no reference to the knowledge described in chapter XIII? verse 7 to 10? but it refers to that kind of knowledge which concerns sacrifices. That kind of knowledge which relates to sacrifices cannot give liberation. But the knowledge which is going to be imparted in this discourse will certainly lead to emancipation. The Lord eulogises this knowledge by the epithets supreme and the best in order to create great interest in Arjuna and other spiritual aspirants.Having learnt this supreme knowledge? all the sages who practised Manana or reflection (Munis) have attained perfection after being freed from bondage to the body.Itah After this life after being freed from this bondage to the body.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
"Lord Shri Krishna continued: Now I will reveal unto the Wisdom which is beyond knowledge, by attaining which the sages have reached Perfection.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
When agitated by some powerful emotion, even a highly intelligent person needs repeated consolation. A man who has identified himself with the individual soul (Jivabhava) cannot easily grasp his true Sachchidananda nature, even after instruction, because of the sorrows of life. Therefore, until the rebellious intellect of the disciples understands this Truth, it becomes necessary for the teachers to repeat these spiritual truths again and again. A mother feeding her small child is an ideal example of this. Until the child has eaten a sufficient amount, the mother coaxes and cajoles him. In the same way, the teacher has to repeat this knowledge again and again until the disciple attains firm and clear knowledge.

Therefore, this chapter begins with the Lord's statement: 'I shall declare to you again that supreme knowledge.' It is not that the supreme knowledge was not told before, but for its further clarification and correct assimilation, its repetition is inevitable.

The Lord calls the subject matter of this chapter 'supreme and best knowledge', which should not be taken literally. The subject of this chapter is the study of the influence of the qualities of nature (Gunas) on the inner self of man and his behavior. This cannot be termed as the highest subject matter of philosophy. However, without a proper understanding of this, a seeker cannot understand and correct his inner defects, and in such a state, he cannot achieve the supreme goal (Purushartha) either. Therefore, the knowledge of these three qualities is called supreme knowledge here.

'Knowing which the sages have attained the supreme perfection' — here a promise is made that with the correct knowledge of the three qualities, the seeker's pilgrimage will become easy. Having complete knowledge of the path to the goal and all potential dangers and difficulties beforehand helps the traveler to prepare for avoiding those crises. In this way, on the spiritual path too, by having full and prior knowledge of the evil tendencies of his mind, a diligent seeker becomes capable of skillfully finding the solution himself when an inner problem arises.

By the word 'muni' we should not imagine an old man with matted hair living in the forest on a diet of roots and fruits. A reflective person is called a muni. In short, the knowledge of the subject of this chapter will help all reflective seekers in accomplishing the goal of their spiritual practice.

According to many Upanishads, here too the attainment of supreme perfection is said to be after death. Some philosophers accept its literal meaning and put forward the view that salvation cannot be attained while living in this life. Liberation is possible only after casting off the body. In scriptural language, this is called Videhamukti. However, Adi Shankaracharya very effectively refutes this view with authentic arguments and supports the theory of Jivanmukti. His view is that a qualified and inquisitive seeker can achieve liberation here and now in this very life. 'After this life' does not mean the death of the physical body, but the destruction of the ego-centric life born of ignorance. That is, the destruction of the ego is intended here, not the body.

In worldly life, we also see that the death of a bachelor is necessary to become a householder, and that of a maiden to become a mother. In these examples, the person does not die, but only celibacy and maidenhood end, so that husbandhood and motherhood can be obtained. Thus, the person remains the same but their social status changes. By rational reflection and true knowledge, our false values of life come to an end, and thus in the light of the newly acquired knowledge, we can live a better, blissful life. The means for this new life is meditation on one's own true nature (Nididhyasana). During the period of practice, it is possible that due to the destructive influence of these three Gunas, even a wise and diligent seeker's mind may be disturbed and lose the peace of meditation. Therefore, by knowing them well and keeping their evil effects away, one hundred percent success is assured.

Now, the Lord states the definite result of this knowledge:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The Bhagavat said  Further, once again I shall explain the supreme knowledge, the best among the knowledges, by knowing which all the seers have gone from here to the Supreme Success.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Lord said  I shall declare again another kind of knowledge:  It is the best of all forms of knowledge, by knowing which all the sages have attained the state of perfection beyond this world.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The Blessed Lord said  I shall speak again of the supreme Knowledge, the best of all knowledges, by realizing which all the contemplatives reached the highest Perfection from here.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Salutations to the giver of knowledge who makes the means possible. The Lord speaks of the means (sadhana) primarily in the subsequent chapters.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
In order to make known the unknown fact that the union of Kshetra (field) and Kshetrajna (knower of the field) is the cause of all creation, the Lord introduces this new chapter, showing the connection between the two chapters (the previous and the current ones) in terms of their introducing and introduced relationship, saying 'sarvam' (all). Or, he indicates the start of the chapter in another way, saying 'athava' (or else). To state that, he reiterates what was said earlier, saying 'ishvara...' (Lord...). The Purusha's dwelling in Prakriti is the superimposition of oneness with Prakriti, and his attachment to the gunas (objects like sound etc.) is his deep absorption in them. By raising six kinds of questions and starting the chapter to answer them, the relationship with the previous chapter is established as before, saying 'kasmin...' (in which...). The word 'ca' (and) is used to combine the meaning of the previous section with this chapter. To prevent the word 'param' from being interpreted in the sense of future time, he says 'param...'. He points out that the word 'bhuyah' (again) does not have the meaning of 'more' here, saying 'punah...' (again...). He explains the meaning of 'punah' by saying 'purveshu...' (in the previous ones...). In response to the doubt of repetition, he says that repeating it is meaningful because of its subtlety and difficulty in comprehension, saying 'tacca...' (and that...). He indicates the object through a question, 'kim tat...' (what is that...). Taking the genitive case in the sense of selection, he shows its excellence, saying 'sarvesham...' (of all...). Fearing repetition in 'param' and 'uttamam', he says it is not so because of the difference in subject and result, saying 'uttama...' (best...). In 'jnanam jneyam' etc., since 'jnana' refers to virtues like humility (amanitva) etc., and since 'jnana' is the best among them as a means, one might question why it needs to be spoken of again; to this, he says 'jnananam...'; the rest is to be understood as referring to virtues like humility. The rest is to be understood as before after the word 'iti'. He states why this knowledge is superior compared to the knowledge mentioned, saying 'tani...' (those...). He states the fruit of the praise, saying 'shrotrubuddhi...' (intellect of the listener...). A doubt may arise that by saying 'knowing knowledge' (jnanam jnatva), knowledge itself becomes the object of knowledge, leading to infinite regress; to this, he says 'prapya...' (having attained...). If the word 'muni' only refers to the fourth stage of life (sannyasa), then how can they get liberation merely from that without knowledge? To this, he says 'manana...' (reflection...). Distinguishing the perfection (siddhi) from mere knowledge by the adjective 'param' (supreme), he states it to be liberation, saying 'mokshakhyam...' (called liberation...). He states the direct experience of the bondage of the body, saying 'asmad...' (from this...).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Sri Bhagavan said: I will again declare that supreme and best of all knowledges, knowing which all the sages, freed from this world, have attained the supreme perfection.

Commentary—'param bhuyah pravaksyami jnananam jnanamuttamam'—In verses 18, 23 and 34 of the thirteenth chapter, the Lord had explained the knowledge (discrimination) of Kshetra-Kshetrajna and Prakriti-Purusha. The Lord resolves to state that very knowledge again with the words 'bhuyah pravaksyami'.

Of all the worldly and other-worldly knowledges, that is, the knowledge of all arts, sciences, languages, scripts, etc., this knowledge which explains the distinction between Prakriti and Purusha, which transcends Prakriti, and leads to the attainment of God, is the most excellent and supreme. There is no other knowledge equal to it, nor can there be, nor is it possible. The reason is that all other knowledges bind a person to the world.

Although 'uttamam' (best) and 'param' (supreme) both mean the same, yet when two words of the same meaning appear together, they carry two distinct meanings. Therefore, here the word 'uttamam' means that this knowledge is excellent because it severs the relationship with Prakriti and its effect, the world-body; and the word 'param' means that this knowledge is supreme because it leads to the attainment of God.

'yajjnatva munayah sarve param siddhimito gatah'—I shall declare that knowledge knowing which, i.e., experiencing which, great sages have been liberated from this world and attained God. Having attained that knowledge, it never happens that some are liberated and some are not; rather, all the sages who acquire this knowledge are liberated, freed from the bondage and dependence of the world, and attain God.

A person who contemplates on the Truth and has no sense of mineness with the body is called a 'muni'.

The purpose of saying 'param siddhim' (supreme perfection) is that all the accomplishments of worldly works or the accomplishments of yoga-sadhana like anima, mahima, garima, etc., are in reality non-accomplishments (failures). The reason is that they all lead to birth and death, put one in bondage, and act as obstacles in the attainment of God. But the perfection in the form of God-realization is supreme because upon attaining it, a person is freed from the cycle of birth and death.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The Lord said  I shall declare again another kind of knowledge which is distinct from what was taught earlier concerning Gunas such as Sattva, falling within the sphere of Prakrti and Purusa. This knowledge going to be revealed is the best of all forms of knowledge concerning the Prakrti and the self. Having gained this knowledge, all sages, namely, those given to meditation, have attained perfection, beyond this world, the sphere of Samsara, having attained the essential and pure form of the self.

He further extols this knowledge, distinguishing it by its fruits:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Param etc. Knowledge has been described earlier;  the same I shall again explain  thoroughly,  i.e.,  in detail in order to examine individually the nature of the Strands. By knowing  which etc.: By this  [the Bhagavat] proclaims the tested trustworthiness and the popularity of this knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
The word param should be connected with the remote word jnanam.
Pravaksyami, I shall speak; bhuyah, again-even though spoken of more than once in all the preceding chapters; of the param, supreme-it is supreme because it is concerned with the supreme Reality;-which is that?-jnanam, Knowledge; uttamam, the best-since it has the best result; jnananam, of all knowledges-. 'Of all knowledges' does not mean 'of humility' etc. (13.7-11). What then? It means 'among knowledges of all knowable things like sacrifice etc.' They do not lead to Liberation, but this (Knowledge) leads to Liberation. Hence the Lord praises it with the words 'supreme' and 'best', so as to arouse interest in the intellect of the listener.
Yat jnatva, by realizing which, by attaining which Knowledge; sarve, all; munayah, the contemplatives, the monks [But not those who espoused monasticsim as a formality in in the fourth stage of life.] gatah, reached, attained; itah, from here-when this bondage of the body had ceased; param, the highest; siddhim, Perfection, called Liberation. 
And the Lord shows the infallibility of this Perfection:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
He states the subject matter of the subsequent five chapters, saying 'sadhanam...' (the means...). Having resolved in 'Listen to this yoga' (BG 2.39) and up to the end of the sixth chapter, the means of knowledge consisting of action (karma) and meditation (dhyana) along with duties such as abandoning desire have been explained. The details of those duties are elaborated in the subsequent chapters. If one wonders how this is so, given that the Lord's majesty is also described in verses like 'My womb is the great Brahman' (BG 14.3) and 'The sun does not illumine it' (BG 15.6), he says 'pradhanyena' (primarily). This means it is stated on the basis of abundance. The division of chapters is due to the difference in secondary topics. Here, after describing what was stated in 'Whatever is born...' (BG 13.27), this chapter elaborates on the relationship with the Gunas as stated in 'Attachment to Gunas is the cause...' (BG 13.22) and explains the means to overcome it.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Since the Purusha is beginningless and without attributes, he is naturally pure. Although beginningless, Prakriti is contaminated as she consists of the three Gunas.
2. In this world connected with that Prakriti, who indeed transcends the Gunas? This is explained in this chapter through the division of the three Gunas.
Here, explaining first that the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna, mentioned in 'Whatever is born...' (BG 13.27), is not independent as in the view of godless Samkhyas, but by the will of the Lord, and wishing to elaborate on the variety of the world caused by Gunas like Sattva as mentioned in 'Attachment to Gunas is the cause...' (BG 13.22), and explaining the word 'param' mentioned in 'Those who know the distinction between Kshetra and Kshetrajna... and the liberation from the Prakriti of elements go to the Supreme' (BG 13.35), the Lord speaks 'param bhuy...' in two verses. 'I will again declare that Supreme which was spoken of in the previous verse.' The prefix 'pra' in 'pravaksyami' means explaining in detail. What is that Supreme? It is the best of knowledges. Knowledge here means that by which it is known — the philosophical knowledge of the Supreme Person (Purushottama) whose power and majesty are inconceivable, having attained which the sages went to the supreme liberation which transcends the three Gunas, departing from this three-fold world (traigunya).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
In the previous chapter, it was said: 'Whatever being is born, whether unmoving or moving, know it to be from the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna.' There, refuting the godless Samkhya view, it must be stated that the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna is subordinate to Ishvara. Similarly, it was said: 'Attachment to the Gunas is the cause of birth in good and evil wombs.' There, it must be explained: in which Guna is there what kind of attachment, what are the Gunas, and how do they bind? And it was said: 'Those who know the liberation from the Prakriti of elements go to the Supreme.' There, it must be explained: how is there liberation from the Gunas designated as the Prakriti of elements, and what are the characteristics of a liberated person? To explain all this in detail, the fourteenth chapter is begun. Praising the subject matter to be spoken of in two verses in order to generate interest in the listeners, the Blessed Lord said: 'Jnanam' means that by which it is known, i.e., the means to the knowledge of the Supreme Self. It is 'param' (supreme) because it is concerned with the supreme Reality. What is it like? It is 'uttamam' (best) among the external means of knowledge like sacrifices, etc., because it yields the best result. It does not mean among virtues like humility (amanitva) etc., as they are internal means and yield the best result. The difference is that 'param' indicates the excellence of the subject matter, while 'uttamam' indicates the excellence of the result. I shall speak of such knowledge 'bhuyah' (again), though it has been spoken of more than once in the previous chapters, knowing and practicing which all the 'munayah' (contemplatives, monks) have attained 'param siddhim' (supreme perfection, called liberation) 'itah' (from here, after the bondage of the body has ceased).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
In the fourteenth chapter, the Lord, denying the independence of Purusha and Prakriti, explains in detail the variety of the world arising from attachment to the Gunas.
It was said: 'Whatever being is born, whether unmoving or moving, know it to be from the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna, O bull among Bharatas.' Explaining beforehand that this union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna is not independent as in the view of godless Samkhyas, but indeed by the will of Ishvara, and wishing to elaborate on the variety of the world caused by the Gunas as mentioned in 'Attachment to Gunas is the cause of birth in good and evil wombs,' the Lord praises the subject matter to be spoken of. The Blessed Lord spoke in two verses starting with 'param bhuyah'. I shall speak to you again in detail of the 'param' (supreme), which is established in the ultimate truth, 'jnanam' (instruction, that by which it is known). Of what nature is it? It is 'uttamam' (best) among the knowledges concerning penance, action, etc., because it is the cause of liberation. He states the same: knowing and attaining which, all the 'munayah' (reflective sages) have attained 'param siddhim' (supreme perfection) 'itah' (from this body-bondage).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
It was said: 'Whatever being is born, whether unmoving or moving, know it to be from the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna, O bull among Bharatas.' In order to reveal how that is so, and to show that the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna as the cause of the world is dependent on Ishvara, and not independent as held by the Samkhyas; and similarly, it was said: 'Attachment to Gunas is the cause of birth in good and evil wombs.' To explain in which Guna is there what kind of attachment, what are the Gunas, how they bind, how there can be liberation from the Gunas, and what are the characteristics of a liberated person, the Lord begins this chapter. In the beginning, to generate interest in the listeners, the Blessed Lord said: 'param' (supreme). Among all knowledges of knowable objects like sacrifices, etc., this knowledge is 'uttamam' (best) because it has the best result; it is not among virtues like humility (amanitva) etc., which are internal means to the knowledge of Truth. Such knowledge, which is the means to the direct realization of the Supreme Self, though spoken of more than once in the previous chapters, I shall speak again 'bhuyah' (once more) in detail because Brahman is subtle and difficult to comprehend. Knowing which knowledge, all the 'munayah' (reflective ones) have attained 'param siddhim' (supreme perfection, called liberation) 'itah' (from here, i.e., above this bondage of the body).

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Showing its connection with the previous chapter, which is in the form of purifying the subject matter of the previous chapter, he explains the summary verse: 'The fourteenth chapter describes the manner of bondage of the Gunas, their agency, their cessation, and the three paths having their source in Him (Gita Sangraha 18),' starting with 'trayodasha...'. Beginning with 'This body, O son of Kunti, is called the Kshetra...' (BG 13.2) and up to 'Thus the Kshetra, knowledge, and the object of knowledge have been briefly described. My devotee, knowing this, attains My state' (BG 13.19), having in mind that meaning, up to 'from bondage he is released' was stated. By 'the manner of Gunas being the cause of bondage', the phrase 'the manner of bondage of the Gunas' is explained. And by 'the manner of the cessation of Gunas', the phrase 'their cessation' is explained. It is to be noted that the agency of the Gunas and their being the source of the three paths mentioned in the summary verse are not stated in the commentary (bhasya) because they are translated for other purposes or are incidental. Fearing that if the word 'param' is interpreted as 'excellent', it would lead to repetition with 'uttamam', he explains it otherwise: 'distinct from what was taught earlier.' Since this is so, to avoid the contradiction with 'I will again declare' regarding the repetition of what was already said, he states its meaning: 'falling within the sphere of Prakriti and Purusa.' The meaning is: 'I shall declare again here in detail the bondage of the Gunas which was stated in summary in the previous chapter,' so there is no contradiction. Although the syntax 'I will declare again the best of knowledges' is possible, to establish that this knowledge is a must-know, he connects the excellence of knowledge as a separate predicate, saying: 'And that knowledge...' By the general term 'of knowledges', although excellence compared to all other knowledges is obtained, since excellence compared to the knowledge of God is impossible, to exclude that, he says: 'concerning the Prakriti and the self (Purusha).' Since mere knowledge of this subject matter cannot be the cause of supreme perfection and does not result in the practice of its repetition, he says: 'all sages given to meditation.' If 'itah' (from here) is interpreted as referring to the cause of the present knowledge, then even in its absence, since that cause is obtained by the rule of past and future connection, and since the perfection in the form of attaining God which is obtainable only by devotion to God cannot be accomplished by this, and a special relative for 'param' (supreme) is expected, he states its meaning as: 'from this world of Samsara, supreme...' What is this supreme perfection like? To show its nature, he says: 'perfection, namely, attaining the essential and pure form of the self.'

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Krishna, in order to make the son of Pandu (Arjuna) understand the variety of the world arising from its connection with His own Gunas, described it in detail.
Now, describing the variety of the world arising from connection with Gunas like Sattva created for His own sport, in the form of its result, He explains it. There, in two verses, He states the nature of the result: 'param...' (supreme...). I shall speak again 'bhuyah', which was previously spoken of in a general way, but now in detail along with the means; this is the meaning of 'vaksyami' (I will declare). He qualifies the detail with an adjective: of what nature is it? It is 'uttamam' (best), meaning chief, among the previously mentioned means of knowledge. Having thus resolved to declare, He states its being the fruit: 'yat...' (which...). Knowing which knowledge, all the 'munayah' (reflective ones, devoted to its practice) have attained 'param siddhim' (supreme perfection, in the form of direct experience) 'itah' (from here, i.e., from the worldly body). By the word 'sarve' (all), it is indicated that for those who attained perfection, it was by this knowledge alone. By the adjective 'best of knowledges', the excellence of this knowledge among knowledges is shown, and not above devotion (bhakti).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
At the end of the previous chapter, it was said: 'Those who know the liberation from the Prakriti of elements go to the Supreme.' To explain this set of topics: what indeed is the Prakriti of elements, on what support does it produce beings, how does it bind, how is there liberation from it, and what are the characteristics of the liberated souls, the fourteenth chapter is begun. Praising the supreme knowledge to generate interest in the listener, the Blessed Lord said: 'param...' (supreme...). I shall declare again 'bhuyah' (once more), though it has been spoken of more than once, the 'jnanam' (knowledge) which is 'param' (supreme, most excellent) because its subject is Brahman. What is its nature? He states: it is 'uttamam' (best) among the means of knowledge like humility (amanitva) etc., and sacrifices etc., because it is internal (antaranga) and has liberation as its fruit. In the statement 'I know the pot', there are three kinds of knowledge due to the difference of subjects: the knowledge of the ego-sense (aham-artha), of the mental modification in the shape of the pot (ghatakaravritti), and of the pot itself. Among these, the first two are secondary, and that which is the best, the final knowledge in the form of the light illuminating the pot, that alone is the Supreme Brahman; this is the meaning. As stated by the authors of the Vartikas: 'That consciousness which is accepted as the fruit among the cognized external objects, that alone is the object to be known here, according to the authority of the Upanishadic statements.' Knowing which knowledge, i.e., having directly realized it through the mental modification born of the Upanishadic statements, they have attained 'param siddhim' (supreme perfection, i.e., liberation) 'itah' (departing from this Samsara, leaving the Samsara).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Again I shall declare to you this supreme wisdom, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have attained the supreme perfection.

 From the Seventh Chapter to the end of the Twelfth Chapter, Śrī Kṛṣṇa in detail reveals the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now, the Lord Himself is further enlightening Arjuna. If one understands this chapter through the process of philosophical speculation, he will come to an understanding of devotional service. In the Thirteenth Chapter, it was clearly explained that by humbly developing knowledge one may possibly be freed from material entanglement. It has also been explained that it is due to association with the modes of nature that the living entity is entangled in this material world. Now, in this chapter, the Supreme Personality explains what those modes of nature are, how they act, how they bind and how they give liberation. The knowledge explained in this chapter is proclaimed by the Supreme Lord to be superior to the knowledge given so far in other chapters. By understanding this knowledge, various great sages attained perfection and transferred to the spiritual world. The Lord now explains the same knowledge in a better way. This knowledge is far, far superior to all other processes of knowledge thus far explained, and knowing this many attained perfection. Thus it is expected that one who understands this Fourteenth Chapter will attain perfection.