Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
daṃṣṭrākarālāni ca te mukhāni dṛṣṭvaiva kālānalasannibhāni .
diśo na jāne na labhe ca śarma prasīda deveśa jagannivāsa

Word Meanings:
दंष्ट्राकरालानि - fearful with teeth
च - and
ते - Thy
मुखानि - mouths
दृष्ट्वा - having seen
एव - even
कालानलसन्निभानि - blazing like Pralayafires
दिशः - the four arters
न - not
जाने - know
न - not
लभे - do obtain
च - and
शर्म - peace
प्रसीद - have mercy
देवेश - O Lord of gods
जगन्निवास - O Refuge of the universe

Life Application:
Look upon the fierce aspect of time devouring all creations, seeking refuge in divine mercy and grace.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Seeing Your mouths which are terrible due to fangs and blazing like the fire of cosmic dissolution, I am neither able to know the directions nor am I finding any peace; therefore, O Lord of gods! O Abode of the universe! Be pleased.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Having seen Thy mouths fearful with teeth (blazing) like the fires of cosmic dissolution, I know not the four arters, nor do I find peace. Have mercy, O Lord of the gods, O abode of the universe.

दंष्ट्राकरालानि fearful with teeth? च and? ते Thy? मुखानि mouths? दृष्ट्वा having seen? एव even? कालानलसन्निभानि blazing like Pralayafires? दिशः the four arters? न not? जाने know? न not? लभे do (I) obtain? च and? शर्म peace? प्रसीद have mercy? देवेश O Lord of the gods? जगन्निवास O abode of the universe.Commentary Jagannivasa The substratum of the universe.Kalanala The fires which consume the worlds during the final dissolution of the worlds (Pralaya). Time (Kala) is the consumer of all that is manifest.Diso no jane I do not know the four arters. I cannot distinguish the east from the west? nor the north from the south.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
When I see Thy mouths with their fearful jaws like glowing fires at the dissolution of creation, I lose all sense of place; I find no rest. Be merciful, O Lord in whom this universe abides!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
As described in the verse, Arjuna, seeing such a terrifying form, is losing his fortitude and happiness. This is a picture of all-devouring Time, which reduces everything to one form. When such a massive sight appears before one's vision, and that too so suddenly, its very scale of magnitude as if chokes the power of discrimination, and for a moment, the person becomes insensate. The state of confusion and disorganization is expressed here in these words: 'I am not able to know the directions.' The matter does not end here. 'Neither am I able to maintain fortitude nor peace.' In this state of ultimate wonder, the astonished human realizes that his physical strength, mental capacities, and intellectual sharpness, both individually and collectively, are indeed insignificant resources. The tiny ego, casting away its shroud of false pride and armor of false strength, completely denuded, submits itself with humility before the power of the Totality. For a person who, before the supreme divine, cosmic power, has fully understood the meaninglessness of his hollow prides, only one refuge remains, and that is prayer. At the end of this verse, Arjuna prays, 'O Lord of gods, O Abode of the universe, please be pleased.' Through this prayer, Vyasaji shows that a true prayer can never be offered by a person whose heart is filled with pride and vanity. Only when a person understands his insignificance in this vast cosmic universe, does he spontaneously pray from a true heart. Arjuna was doubtful of his victory in this war. The main purpose of this section, starting from the 21st verse, is to give Arjuna some foreknowledge of future events. Assuring him of the outcome of the war, the Lord now directly shows the warriors of the armies entering the mouth of Time.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
By merely seeing Your faces that are frightening with tusks and are looking like the fire of destruction, I do not know the arters and get no peace.   Have mercy, O  Lord of gods !  O Abode of the Universe !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Viewing Your mouths, presenting awe-generating fangs and looking like the consuming fire of final destruction, I know not the arters of the globe nor do I find repose. Be gracious, O Lord of the Devas! O Abode of the universe!

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Having merely seen Your mouths made terrible with (their) teeth and resembling the fire of Dissolution, I have lost the sense of direction and find no comfort. Be gracious, O Lord of gods, O Abode of the Universe.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Even though the body of the Lord is being seen, the other reason for the absence of satisfaction etc. is stated in the form of a question — 'Why?'. By the use of the word 'eva' (merely/only) in 'dṛṣṭvaiva' (having merely seen), the actual reaching or entering (of the mouths) is excluded.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Seeing Your mouths, which are blazing like the fire of cosmic dissolution and are terrible due to fangs, I am neither able to know the directions nor am I finding any peace. Therefore, O Lord of gods! O Abode of the universe! Be pleased.

Explanation—'daṃṣṭrākarālāni ca te mukhāni dṛṣṭvaiva kālānalasannibhāni'— The fire that appears at the time of the great dissolution (pralaya) to reduce the entire three worlds to ashes is called Samvartaka or Kalagni. Your mouths are like that Kalagni, which are very terrifying due to fearful fangs. Just seeing them causes great fear. If their function is witnessed, it is difficult for anyone to survive before them.

'diśo na jāne na labhe ca śarma'— Seeing such terrible mouths, I am not even able to know the directions. This implies that the knowledge of directions comes from the rising and setting of the sun. But that sun is in place of Your eyes, meaning it has come within Your cosmic form (Virat-rupa). Besides, all around You, there is only a grand blazing light visible (11.12), which has neither rising nor setting. Therefore, I am not getting the knowledge of directions, and due to fear upon seeing the terrible mouths, I am not obtaining any kind of happiness and peace.

'prasīda deveśa jagannivāsa'— You are the Lord of all gods, and the entire universe resides in You. Therefore, when any god or human is frightened, they will call out only to You! Who else will they call besides You? And who else will listen? Therefore, I too am calling out to You, saying: O Lord of gods! O Abode of the universe! Be pleased. Seeing the terrifying form of the Lord, Arjuna felt as if the Lord was in great anger. Keeping this feeling in mind, the frightened Arjuna is praying to the Lord to be pleased.

Relationship — Now, in the next two verses, Arjuna describes the entry of the main warriors into the cosmic form.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Looking at Your mouths, extremely terrifying and like cosmic fire at the end of the universe, and operating for the destruction of everything, I have lost the sense of recognising the arters of the sky, nor do I feel happy and peaceful. O Abode of all the worlds, O Lord of all the Devas, namely, O Overlord of even gods like Brahma! Be gracious unto me. The meaning is:  'Do act in such a way that I may attain my natural condition.

Arjuna's charioteer (Parthasarathi), thus showing that all the worlds depend upon Him for their existence and activities, showed to the son of Prtha (Arjuna) that what He wanted to do, making Arjuna a mere instrument of His, was to lighten the burden of the earth through the destruction of all those who were of Asuric manifestations and who, in the guise of kings, were presenting themselves as the sons of Dhrtarastra and their followers. Many such embodiments of Asuras were present also in the ranks of Yudhisthira's followers. And Arjuna, after having realised with the divine eyes, received through His grace, the complete manifestation of the Lord as the Creator etc., witnessed also the slaughter of the followers of the sons of Dhrtarastra etc., in that Lord Himself, who is the Self of all, even though it (the slaughter) had not happened actually according to human calculations. Arjuna continues:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Drstva eva, having merely seen; te, Your; mukhani, mouths; damstra-karalani, made terrible with (their) teeth; and kala-anala-sannibhani, resembling the fire of Dissolution is kalanala; similar to that; na jane, I have lost; the sense of disah, direction-I do not know the directions as to which is East or which is West; and hence, na labhe, find no; sarma, comfort. Therefore, prasida, be gracious; devesa, O Lord of gods; jagannivasa, O Abode of the Universe!
'The apprehension which was there of my getting defeated by those offers, that too has cleared away, since-'

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Daṃṣṭra...' (With fangs...). Having merely seen Your mouths, which are terrifying due to the distortion caused by the fangs and are resembling the fire of cosmic dissolution, and not having actually entered them, out of fear, I do not know the directions by distinguishing between East, West, etc. Therefore, I do not find any comfort (happiness) even upon seeing Your form. Therefore, O Lord of gods! O Abode of the universe! Be gracious (pleased) towards me. The implied sense is: 'so that in the absence of fear, I may obtain the happiness born of Your vision'.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover, 'Daṃṣṭra...' (With fangs...). O Lord of gods! Seeing Your mouths, due to being overcome by fear, I do not know the directions. And I do not find any comfort or happiness. O Abode of the universe! Be pleased. What kind of mouths? Terrifying with fangs, and resembling 'Kālānalah', the fire of cosmic dissolution.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having merely seen Your mouths, which are terrifying due to fangs and resemble the fire of cosmic dissolution, and not having entered them, I do not know the directions by distinguishing between East and West. I find no comfort or happiness. Therefore, O Lord of gods! O Abode of the universe! Be pleased. The two addresses (Devesa and Jagannivasa) are used to indicate: 'Your being the Lord of gods and the Abode of the universe has been directly perceived by me, which was the purpose of my prayer'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The verse beginning with 'Daṃṣṭra...' is meant to express that the mouths are extremely terrifying compared to other limbs, and to propitiate the Lord by showing one's extreme fear. The comparison with Kālānalah (the fire of cosmic dissolution) indicates that they are engaged in the destruction of everything. It also indicates the connection with that activity (of destruction) by virtue of being the form of Time itself. The meaning of 'daṃṣṭrā-karālāni' is 'extremely terrifying'. The word 'karāla' means having projecting teeth, deformed, or terrifying. In the word 'jagannivāsa', if a Bahuvrīhi compound is intended (he in whom the universe resides), then the reference to being the substratum of everything as mentioned in 'ihaikastham' (11.7) etc. would not be repeated; but if a Tatpuruṣa compound (the abode of the universe) is intended, it aligns with the context; with this intention, he says: 'abode of the worlds' (jagataṃ nivāsa). By the word 'deveśa', it is indicated that the status of being the Lord of all lords, as well-known in the Śruti passage 'tam īśvarāṇāṃ paramaṃ maheśvaram' (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.7), has been directly perceived as taught; with this intention, he says 'of Brahmā and others...'. By this, it is implied: 'Even Brahmā and others cannot look upon You, how much less a small creature like me'. Regarding 'towards me' (mām prati): Is the Lord angry with Arjuna, such that grace is being prayed for? Here, the result of grace is stated by 'yathā aham' (so that I may attain my natural state).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover, due to an excess of fear, he represents again: 'Daṃṣṭra...' (With fangs...). O Lord of gods, who is worshiped by all! Your mouths are terrifying with fangs, producing fear. And also, having merely seen them resembling the fire of cosmic dissolution, out of fear, I do not know the directions, meaning I do not know the destination to go to. I do not obtain any comfort or happiness in the form of beholding You. Therefore, O Abode of the universe, O Protector of the universe, O You who are the very form of the happy state of the universe! Be pleased, and show me the destination — this is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Kālānalah' is the fire of cosmic dissolution; resembling that. 'Prasīda' means be pleased, i.e., be gracious and bestow happiness.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I cannot keep my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces and awful teeth. In all directions I am bewildered.

There is no purport for this verse