Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
jñānaṃ karma ca kartāca tridhaiva guṇabhedataḥ .
procyate guṇasaṅkhyāne yathāvacchṛṇu tānyapi

Word Meanings:
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
कर्म - action
च - and
कर्ता - actor
च - and
त्रिधा - of three kinds
एव - only
गुणभेदतः - according to the distinction
प्रोच्यते - are declared
गुणसंख्याने - in the Sankhya philosophy (science of Gunas)
यथावत् - duly
श्रृणु - hear
तानि - them
अपि - also.

Life Application:
Knowledge, action, and agent are declared threefold according to gunas; hear of them as they are.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Knowledge, action, and doer also are declared in the science of Gunas (Sankhya philosophy) to be of three kinds only, according to the distinction of the Gunas. Hear of these also from Me as they are.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Knowledge, action and actor are declared in the science of the Gunas (Sankhya philosophy) to be of three kinds only, according to the distinction of the Gunas. Of these also, hear duly.

ज्ञानम् knowledge? कर्म action? च and? कर्ता actor? च and? त्रिधा of three kinds? एव only? गुणभेदतः according to the distinction of Gunas? प्रोच्यते are declared? गुणसंख्याने in the science of Gunas (Sankhya philosophy)? यथावत् duly? श्रृणु hear? तानि them? अपि also.Commentary The three alities overpower the whole of creation with their special nature and bring it entirely under their control. The nature of action? the actor and his knowledge are threefold according to the Gunas that is predominant. If all the three are Sattvic? then the action will not bind the man.Karta The doer of the actions.The science of the Gunas here referred to is Kapilas system of philosophy. Though the Sankhya system is opposed to Vedanta with reference to the Supreme Truth? viz.? the oneness or nonduality of Brahman? yet it is an authority on the science of the Gunas.I shall describe knowledge? action and actor? as also their various distinctions caused by different Gunas? scientifically and rationally. Hear My teachings? O Arjuna? with rapt attention. You will be immensely benefited.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The knowledge, the act and the doer differ according to the Qualities. Listen to this too:

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The subject of the upcoming verses is introduced here. In the fourteenth chapter, the characteristics, functions, and influence of the three gunas (sattva, rajas, and tamas) were described in detail. The diversity in human nature and actions arises from the dominance or combination of these three gunas. Here, the word 'guna-sankhyane' refers to Sage Kapila's Sankhya philosophy, which describes the play of these three gunas. 'Yathavat' means logically and scripturally. The Lord calls upon Arjuna to listen attentively, as this topic is of great importance. He begins by describing the threefold knowledge.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The instrument of knowledge, the object and the agent are just three kinds because of the differences in the Strands-thus it is declared in enumerating the Strands.  These also you must listen to [from Me]  as they are.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Knowledge, act and agent are declared in the science of Gunas to be of three kinds, according to the difference in the Gunas. Listen about them also as they are.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Knowledge, action and agent are stated in the teaching about the gunas to be only of three kinds according to the differences of the gunas. Hear about them also as they are.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
To further explain the means of spiritual realization, the Lord speaks of the distinctions caused by the gunas. 'Guna-sankhyane' refers to the section counting the gunas.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
In the upcoming nine verses, the Lord describes the differences in knowledge, action, and doer due to the gunas. Here, 'Sankhya' refers to Kapila's system which is authoritative on the science of the gunas, although it differs on the absolute non-duality of Brahman.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
In the science of Gunas (Sankhya philosophy), which classifies every object according to its qualities, knowledge, action, and actor are declared to be of three kinds only, according to the distinction of the Gunas. Hear of these also from Me as they are.

Commentary: The Lord now begins the classification of knowledge, action, and doer according to the three gunas. Knowledge is selected because every action is preceded by knowledge. Action and doer are chosen because their combination binds the individual. By cultivating sattvic knowledge, action, and doer-ship, one can attain liberation. The term 'yathavat' means as described in the scriptures without any modification.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The knowledge of action which ought to be done, the act to be performed, and the performer of the act are threefold, each of them being divided in accordance with Sattva etc., Listen about these, which are differentiated according to the Gunas.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Jnanam etc.  In enumerating the Strands :  In the consdered conclusion of the Sankhya  where the Strands are decided numerically, these instruments of  knowledge etc., are declared to be of three types.  that you must listen to.  This is what is  conveyed by the association of words  (or ideas)  here.  By instrument-of-knowledge  (Jnanam)  the two-fold instruments viz. that of knowledge and of activity, are spoken of.  Similarly object (karman)  speaks of both the object of knowledge and  the object of activity and agent  (kartr) refers to both the knower and the performer.								
 Now the three verses.  Sarvabhutesu etc.  (20-22) speak of the three-foldness of the instrument of knowledge.  That is why the Instrumental Yena is employed.  The nature of all the instruments of knowledge and of action is described by this much of portion.  The three-foldness of object of both the types viz.  the object of knowledge and the object of action is described by the tripple verses Niyatam etc.  (23-25).  The three-fold nature of the agent of both the categories viz.  the knower and the doer is briefly explained by the three verses  Muktasangah etc.  (26-28).  The three types of the intellect is examined by three verses,  Pravrttim etc.  (30-32), in order to explain the different nature of   the two-fold   instruments  (i.e. of knowledge and of action). By this means the three-fold nature of other instrumetns is also indicated.  The instrument reires technical  know-how, and this technical know-how, of course, consists of the pentad that includes content and so on.  However, because faith [included in this pentad]  has already been dealt with  (XVII, 2ff.), and because the desire to know and the aversion to know [both belonging to the pentad] are obtained by inference through the firmness and happiness [of the pentad],  the three-fold division of the last two is explained by the verses  Dhrtya yaya etc. (33-35) and Sukham tu idanim etc.  (36-39).  All this [the Lord] declares [one by one] ;-

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Jnanam, knowledge; karma, action-not the objective case in the technical sense, which is defined as 'that which is most cheirshed by the subject'; and karta, agent, the accomplisher of actions; procyate, are stated; guna-sankhyane, in the teaching about the gunas, in the philosophy of Kapila; to be eva, only (-only is used for emphasis, by way of showing that they have no classification other than that based on the gunas-); tridha, of three kinds; guna-bhedatah, according to the differences of the gunas, i.e. according to the differences of sattva etc.
Even that philosophy teaching about the gunas is certainly vaild so far as it concerns the experiencer of the gunas, though it is contradictory so far as the non-duality of the supreme Reality, Brahman, is concerned. Those followers of Kapila are acknoweldge authorities in the ascertainment of the functions of the gunas and their derivatives. Hence, that scripture, too, is being referred to by way of eulogy of the subject-matter going to be spoken of. Therefore there is no contradiction.
Srnu, hear; tani, about them; api, also; yathavat, as they are, as established by reason and as propounded in the scriptures. Hear about knowledge etc. and all their diversities created by the differences of the gunas. The idea is , 'Concentrate your mind on the subject going to be taught.'
And now the threefold classification of knowledge is being stated:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
The differences in the modes of nature for knowledge, action, and doer are described here. Sage Kapila's Sankhya philosophy, which complies with Vedic teachings in this regard, is referred to as 'guna-sankhyana'.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The knowledge, the action, and the doer are declared to be threefold according to the Gunas. Guna-sankhyane means Sankhya philosophy.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The triad of knowledge, action, and doer is categorized into three types based on the gunas. Kapila's Sankhya system, though not authoritative on the absolute oneness of Brahman, is authoritative in the analysis of the gunas. Listen to this description attentively.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The science of Gunas (Sankhya) states that knowledge, action, and agent are of three kinds each, according to the distinction of the Gunas. Listen about them also as they are. The absolute Self is beyond these classifications.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Knowledge, action, and agent are classified into three kinds only based on the gunas. Kapila's scripture is quoted to highlight that this analysis is well-established. Listen attentively to the division established by reason.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The categories of knowledge, action, and agent correspond to the items mentioned in the previous verse. Guna-sankhyane refers to Kapila's text which counts Gunas and their effects. Listen duly to their differences.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Knowledge, action, and agent are of three kinds according to the Gunas. This is declared in Kapila's system. Listen about them duly to understand their characteristics.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Action is motivated by the triad of knowledge, object, and knower. The constituents of action are the instrument, the action, and the doer.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
According to the three different modes of material nature, there are three kinds of knowledge, action and performer of action. Now hear of them from Me.

 In the Fourteenth Chapter the three divisions of the modes of material nature were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that the mode of goodness is illuminating, the mode of passion materialistic, and the mode of ignorance conducive to laziness and indolence. All the modes of material nature are binding; they are not sources of liberation. Even in the mode of goodness one is conditioned. In the Seventeenth Chapter, the different types of worship by different types of men in different modes of material nature were described. In this verse, the Lord says that He wishes to speak about the different types of knowledge, workers and work itself according to the three material modes.