Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
etairvimuktaḥ kaunteya tamodvāraistribhirnaraḥ .
ācaratyātmanaḥ śreyastato yāti parāṃ gatim

Word Meanings:
एतैः - from these
विमुक्तः - liberated
कौन्तेय - O Kaunteya
तमोद्वारैः - gates to darkness
त्रिभिः - three
नरः - the man
आचरति - practises
आत्मनः - for him
श्रेयः - what is good
ततः - and then
याति - goes to
पराम् - the Supreme
गतिम् - Goal.

Life Application:
A man freed from these three gates of darkness acts for his own good and reaches the supreme goal.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
A man who is liberated from these three gates to darkness, O Arjuna, practises what is good for him and thus goes to the Supreme Goal.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
A man who is liberated from these three gates to darkness, O Arjuna, practises what is good for him and thus goes to the Supreme Goal.

एतैः from these? विमुक्तः liberated? कौन्तेय O Kaunteya? तमोद्वारैः gates to darkness? त्रिभिः (by) three? नरः the man? आचरति practises? आत्मनः for him? श्रेयः what is good? ततः and then? याति goes to? पराम् the Supreme? गतिम् Goal.Commentary When these gates to hell are abandoned? the path to salvation is made clear for the aspirant. He gets the company of sages? which leads to liberation. He gets spiritual instructions and practises them. He hears the scriptures? reflects? meditates and attains Selfrealisation.Tamodvara Gate to darkness leading to hell which is full of pain and delusion.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
These are the gates which lead to darkness; if a man avoid them he will ensure his own welfare, and in the end will attain his liberation.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
A man who is liberated from these three gates to darkness, O Arjuna, practises what is good for him and thus goes to the Supreme Goal.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that the word 'sreyas' (good) is rich in meaning, representing actions that lead to both individual spiritual growth and social welfare. One cannot attain the highest goal without saving mental energy, which is otherwise wasted in lust, anger, and greed. When these three gates to darkness are abandoned, the seeker naturally moves toward self-purification, self-discipline, and scriptural study. Under this systematic training, his soul evolves gradually, just as a flower bud blossoms, and he eventually attains the Supreme Goal of Self-realization.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O son of   Kunti !  A man, who has deserted these three gates of darkness, does what is good for his Self and thery reaches the highest goal.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
One who has been released from these threefold gates of darkness, O Arjuna, works for the good of the self. Hence he reaches the supreme state.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O son of Kunti, a person who is free from these three doors to darkness strives for the good of the soul. Thery he attains the highest Goal.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that by abandoning the three doors of darkness and practicing righteous deeds, a person not only achieves liberation through right knowledge but also experiences peace and happiness in this world.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Liberated from these three gates to darkness, O Arjuna, a man practises what is good for him and thus goes to the Supreme Goal.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'gates to darkness' refers to the ignorance that covers the intellect when ruled by desire, anger, and greed. When a seeker commits to spiritual life, he must be extremely vigilant to not give these defects any opportunity to influence his conduct. Merely performing rituals is insufficient if one continues to harbour these inner impurities. By fully freeing oneself from these, the soul's natural purity shines forth, leading to self-realization and liberation.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
One who has been 'released from these three' - from desire, wrath and greed which constitute the gates of darkness causing erroneous knowledge of Myself -, he works for the good of the self. Gaining knowledge of Myself, he endevaours to be inclined towards Me. From there, he attains the supreme goal, which is Myself.

Sri Krsna now teaches that the main cause of this Kind of degeneration is lack of reverence for the Sastras:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Trividham etc. Etaih etc.  Because the traid of desire etc.,  constitute the gate to the hell, therefore one should avoid that.					
 What has been stated should not be neglected on the assumption that it is  [based on]  the human word.  On the other hand, there is the authority of the eternal scripture on this subject.  This is said [here] –

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O son of Kunti, narah, a person; who is vimuktah, free; etaih, from these; tribhih, three; tamo-dvaraih, doors to darkness, i.e., passion etc. which are doors to the darkness of hell consisting of sorrow and delusion; freed from three three which are such, acarati, strives for;-for what?-sreyah, the good; atmanah, of the soul: darred by which (doors) he could not strive earlier, and on the dispelling of which he strives. Tatah, thery, as a result of that striving; yati, he attains; the param, suprme; gatim, Goal, i.e. Liberation, as well. [Not only does he attain Liberation by renouncing the demoniacal alities, but he also secures happiness in this world.]
The scripture is instrumental in this complete renunciation of the demoniacal alities and striving for what is good. Both can be undertaken on the authority of the scriptures, not otherwise. Hence,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that by being freed from these three gates of hell, a person attains the highest goal (which is the Supreme Personality of Godhead).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that one who is free from desire, anger, and greed practices the righteous actions taught by the Vedas. Free from obstruction, he experiences happiness in this world and eventually attains liberation through right knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that freed from these three gates of hell, a person performs penance, meditation, and other spiritual practices for the welfare of the soul, which leads him to liberation.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that a person freed from these three performs the worship of the Lord. Thus, experiencing happiness in this world, he goes to the supreme state of liberation.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the 'gate of darkness' leads to wrong knowledge of the Self and God. Freed from them, one acts in accordance with God's will (anukulya), which leads to the Supreme Goal (the Lord Himself).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that freed from these three doors of hell, a person practices devotion (bhajana) to the Lord, which leads him to the Supreme Goal.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'freed from the gates of darkness' means being released from the doors of hell. One then performs worship of the Lord, which leads to liberation.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kuntī, performs acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attains the supreme destination.

 One should be very careful of these three enemies to human life: lust, anger and greed. The more a person is freed from lust, anger and greed, the more his existence becomes pure. Then he can follow the rules and regulations enjoined in the Vedic literature. By following the regulative principles of human life, one gradually raises himself to the platform of spiritual realization. If one is so fortunate, by such practice, to rise to the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then success is guaranteed for him. In the Vedic literature, the ways of action and reaction are prescribed to enable one to come to the stage of purification. The whole method is based on giving up lust, greed and anger. By cultivating knowledge of this process, one can be elevated to the highest position of self-realization; this self-realization is perfected in devotional service. In that devotional service, the liberation of the conditioned soul is guaranteed. Therefore, according to the Vedic system, there are instituted the four orders of life and the four statuses of life, called the caste system and the spiritual order system. There are different rules and regulations for different castes or divisions of society, and if a person is able to follow them, he will be automatically raised to the highest platform of spiritual realization. Then he can have liberation without a doubt.