Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
OMtatsaditi nirdeśo brahmaṇastrividhaḥ smṛtaḥ .
brāhmaṇāstena vedāśca yajñāśca vihitāḥ purā

Word Meanings:
तत्सत् - Om Tat Sat
इति - thus
निर्देशः - designation
ब्रह्मणः - of Brahman
त्रिविधः - threefold
स्मृतः - has been declared
ब्राह्मणाः - Brahmanas
तेन - by that
वेदाः - Vedas
च - and
यज्ञाः - sacrifices
च - and
विहिताः - created
पुरा - formerly.

Life Application:
'Om Tat Sat' is declared as threefold designation of Brahman, by which scriptures, rituals, and sacrifices were ordained.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
'OM TAT SAT' has been declared as the triple designation of Brahman. By that, at the beginning of creation, the Brahmanas, the Vedas, and the sacrifices were ordained.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
"Om Tat Sat": This has been declared to be the triple designation of Brahman. By that were created formerly, the Brahmanas, the Vedas and the sacrifices.

तत्सत् Om Tat Sat? इति thus? निर्देशः designation? ब्रह्मणः of Brahman? त्रिविधः threefold? स्मृतः has been declared? ब्राह्मणाः Brahmanas? तेन by that? वेदाः Vedas? च and? यज्ञाः sacrifices? च and? विहिताः created? पुरा formerly.Commentary Om Tat Sat is the root of the entire universe. Om is the Akshara Brahman. Tat means Thath? the indefinable. Sat means Reality.Para Brahman? that Supreme Being? the abiding place of all that lives and moves? is beyond name and class. The Vedas have ventured to give a name to Him. A new born child has no name but no,receiving one he will answer to it. Men who are troubled by the afflictions of this world run to the Deity for refuge and call Him by the name. When Brahman is invoked through the name that which is hidden is revealed to the aspirant.These three words have a divine power of their own. The vibrations that they produce in one are such as to arouse the latent divinity and also to secure the necessary response from the Cosmic Being Whom they connote.When a sacrificial rite or the like is found defective? it will be rendered perfect by the utterance of the powerful Mantra Om Tat Sat or one of the three designations in the end. With Om or Om Tat Sat all acts of sacrifice? study of sacred scriptures? spiritual discipline and meditation are commenced. If the doer of sacrifices remembers either of these Mantras all obstacles that stand in the way of success of the sacrifices are removed.Om Tat Sat has been declared to be the triple designation of Brahman in the Vedanta by the knowers of Brahman. The power of creation that lies in the Creator emanates from this Mantra. When He meditated inwardly on the meaning of this Mantra and repeated the threefold word? He acired the power to create. Then He created the Brahmanas? gave them the Vedas to be their guide and directed them to perform sacrifices and other rites.Puraa Of old At the beginning of creation by the Prajapati.Brahman here means the Veda.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Om Tat Sat' is the triple designation of the Eternal Spirit, by which of old the Vedic Scriptures, the ceremonials and the sacrifices were ordained.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
'OM TAT SAT' is the threefold designation (nirdesa) of Brahman. 'OM' represents the unmanifest Supreme; 'TAT' represents the cause of the universe; 'SAT' represents the absolute existence. Invoking this mantra purifies and sanctifies all our actions and intentions, removing any inherent defects in our rituals. From this source, Brahmanas, Vedas, and sacrifices were created.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
OM  TAT  SAT :  This is held to be the three-fold indication of the Brahman.  By means of that, the Vedas, and also the sacrifices had been fashioned formerly by Brahma.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Om, Tat, Sat - thus Brahman is denoted by this threefold expression. Associated with these, Brahmanas, the Vedas and sacrifices were ordained in the past.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
'Om-tat-sat' ['Om, That, Existence': 'Om iti brahma, Om is Brahman' (Tai. 1.8.1); 'Tattvamasi, Thou art That' (Ch. 6.8.7); and 'Sadeva somya idamagra asit, This was Existence alone in the beginning, O amiable one' (Ch. 6.2.1)-in these texts Brahman is indicated by the words Om, tat, sat.]-this is considered to be the threefold designation of Brahman. The Brahmanas and Vedas and the sacrifices were ordanined by that in the days of yore.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that 'OM', 'TAT', and 'SAT' are the names of the Supreme Brahman. 'OM' signifies that the Lord pervades everything and is complete; 'TAT' signifies that He is ever-beyond and known only through the Veda; and 'SAT' signifies His association with all auspicious qualities and ultimate existence. By His command, for His worship, He ordained the Vedas, Brahmanas, and sacrifices of old.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains how defects in sacrifices, gifts, and austerities can be corrected by chanting the triple names of Brahman: 'OM', 'TAT', and 'SAT'. Chanting these names restores perfection. The creation of Brahmanas, Vedas, and sacrifices by Prajapati at the beginning of creation is mentioned to praise the greatness of this triple designation.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
'OM TAT SAT': This has been declared to be the triple designation of Brahman. By that were created formerly, the Brahmanas, the Vedas and the sacrifices.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'OM', 'TAT', and 'SAT' are three names of the Supreme Reality. At the beginning of creation, God created the Vedas (which guide actions), the Brahmanas (who perform them), and the sacrifices (the actions themselves). When a seeker performs noble deeds in a selfless manner, any minor defects or omissions (anga-vaigunya) in the performance are completely rectified and perfected by remembering and chanting the name of God.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Here Brahman means the Veda. It is the secondary meaning of the expression, especially of the ritualistic portion of the Veda. The three-fold expression Om Tat Sat is connected with the Brahman  or the Veda. Sacrifices and similar rituals are prescribed in the Vedas. These expressions Om Tat Sat are used in these Vedic rites. The connection of Om is that it should be invariably used at the commencement of the recitation of Vedic hymns. The syllable Tat and Sat indicate that these rituals are worthy of honour. The Brahmanas are those who are to preserve Vedic study as also the Vedas and the sacrificial rites ordained in them. All these were created by Me in the past.

Sri Krsna elaborates in the next verses the nature of the connection of these syllables with the Vedic rituals, beginning first with Om.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.23–17.27 jointly): Om etc. upto abhidhiyate.  An indication of the Brahman i.e., an act of facing (or aiming at)  the Brahman is made by these  three words viz.,  OM, TAT and SAT.  Of  them, Om indicates that 'This purport of the scriptures is [to be]  accepted as long as one has bodily connection'.

The pronoun TAT, which denotes generality and which is incapable of denoting exclusively a particular, mentions, as far as the Brahman is concerned, the absence of intention for fruit.  An intention is not possible without reference to something particular. No doubt  [TAT] may denote all particulars  [in general]. But it would lead to intending the fruits and the doer-ship with regard to all [in general].  Even then [the Brahman] cannot have connection with any particular fruit.

The Vedic word SAT denotes 'praise'.  The act, like this sacrifice etc., though performed, turns out to be an act of the Tamas (evil act) if it is performed with the idea, 'It is an evil act'.  Further, what is performed  with an intention for a particular fruit is not praiseworthy, and it causes nothing but bondage. Therefore, those, who bear in mind, 'This is a thing to be performed' - they are not fettered, even though they perform acts like sacrifice etc.  With this idea only, it has been said in the Adiparvan as -

'The austerity is not dirt, nor the [Vedic] study, nor the natural ritual enjoined by the Vedas, and nor the act of earning wealth by all efforts.  But, if they are struck by mind, they themselves become dirt.' (MB, Adi. i, 210).

[Here in this passage]  dirt that which fetters.  Natural :  [That is, ordained ], such as - 'Without expecting anything, a Brahman should learn the Vedas etc., together with their six subsidiaries' etc.

By all effort :  by the act that is suitable and is well known in the scriptures and in the worldly practice.  By mind :  by the mind that is yoked to the triad of the Strands, Sattva etc.  [Those actions that]  have been simply ruined  [by that mind], are binding and not otherwise.  This is the idea here.

Therefore, the acts like sacrifice etc., and the acts, like acquiring  [Wealth] etc., for that purpose, have to be performed as being inevitable as long as the body exists.

Or, perhaps, the word  OM  conveys  [with regard to the Brahman]  the idea of That in Which the entire universe has been totally calmed down.  TAT conveys the idea of That of the nature of Sovereign  Independence of Will, which is nothing but comprehending the rising waves in the form of the universe.  And the word SAT denotes the act of manifestation by the Brahman - even though It is complete in Itself - as [the universe]  having  varied nature, a manifestation that  causes differences  (or duality) expanding under the weight of its Sovereign  Independence of Will.  Hence it has been said  'In the sense of manifesting as beings and in the sense of manifesting  perfectly  [SAT is employed].'  Thus, having in front  [as a cause]  that aspect  (the Soul) of  highly tranquil nature; and having in the  centre that aspect which is well connected with desire-waves viz., the desire to make gift, the desire to perform sacrifice and the desire to observe penance; this final body radiates  (or dances)  filled with a group of activities, such as  offering gift, performing sacrifice and observing austerity, and of what are conducive to them.  This triad is indeed simultaneously the inherent nature of the Unhindered One (the Soul).  So, what fruit could be there ?  And to whom ?  How ?  Whence ?  Where ?  And by what means ?

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Om, tat, sat-iti, this; is smrtah, considered, regarded, in the Vedanta, by the knowers of Brahman; to be the trividhah, threefold; nirdesah, designation, mention by name-nirdesa is that by which a thing is specified; brahmanah, of Brahman. The Brahmanas and the Vedas and the sacrifices were vihitah, ordainded, [When some defect arises in sacrifice etc., then this is corrected by uttering one of these words-Om, tat, sat.] created; tena, by that threefold designation; pura, in the days of yore [In the beginning of creation by Prajapati.]-this is said by way of eulogizing the designation.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha explains the etymology and reference of the terms: 'OM' refers to the Lord because the universe is woven (otam) in Him and He is complete; 'TAT' refers to Him as ever-beyond and known only through the scriptures; and 'SAT' refers to His association with all goodness. The creation of Vedas refers to their manifestation (vyanjanam), as they are eternal (apaurusheya), whereas Brahmanas and sacrifices were created by the Lord for His worship and the welfare of creatures.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that 'OM TAT SAT' is the triple designation of Brahman (both the Supreme Purushottama and the Sabda Brahman/Veda). Even if a Vedic sacrifice lacks the proper coordinates of place, time, and materials, it is rendered perfect and complete by invoking these names. In the beginning of creation, the Brahmanas (who recite the name), the Vedas (which contain the name), and the sacrifices (which apply the name) were ordained by Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that unlike food, which has visible results, sacrifices, gifts, and austerities have unseen results (apoorva). Since performers are prone to errors and negligence (pramada), the Lord in His supreme compassion reveals the name 'OM TAT SAT' as the general expiation (samanya-prayaschitta). Reciting these three parts of Brahman's name corrects all defects, making the ritual complete. This name is praised because by it Prajapati created the performers (Brahmanas), instruments (Vedas), and actions (sacrifices) at the beginning of creation.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that to make imperfect acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity perfect, the knowers of Brahman use the triple name: 'OM', 'TAT', and 'SAT'. 'OM' is famous in Upanishads; 'TAT' indicates He who is beyond direct perception; and 'SAT' indicates His absolute existence and goodness. By this name, the Creator manifest the Brahmanas, Vedas, and sacrifices at the beginning, showing its great power.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that the triple name 'OM TAT SAT' is the general expiation for all deficiencies in rituals. To praise this name, the Lord says that the performers (Brahmanas), instruments (Vedas), and actions (sacrifices) were created by Prajapati in the beginning using this triple designation.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'Brahman' here refers to Veda and Vedic rituals. The connection of 'OM' is that it is always used at the beginning of Veda recitation. 'TAT' and 'SAT' show that these rituals are worthy of honor. The three stations of life (Brahmanas) who preserve the Vedas and perform sacrifices were created by Me in the past.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that 'OM' is the direct name of Brahman; 'TAT' refers to Him as indefinable and beyond words; 'SAT' represents His ultimate reality. By reciting this name at the beginning of sacrifices, all deficiencies of place and time are resolved. In the beginning, Brahman created the Brahmanas, Vedas, and sacrifices using this triple designation.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'OM', 'TAT', and 'SAT' are three names of Brahman. In the beginning of creation, Prajapati manifested the Brahmanas, Vedas, and sacrifices by the power of chanting these three names.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
From the beginning of creation, the three words oṁ tat sat were used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth. These three symbolic representations were used by brāhmaṇas while chanting the hymns of the Vedas and during sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Supreme.

 It has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are divided into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. But whether first class, second class or third class, they are all conditioned, contaminated by the material modes of nature. When they are aimed at the Supreme – oṁ tat sat, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternal – they become means for spiritual elevation. In the scriptural injunctions such an objective is indicated. These three words, oṁ tat sat, particularly indicate the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the word oṁ is always found. One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will not attain the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, but not the ultimate end of life. The conclusion is that the performance of charity, sacrifice and penance must be done in the mode of goodness. Performed in the mode of passion or ignorance, they are certainly inferior in quality. The three words oṁ tat sat are uttered in conjunction with the holy name of the Supreme Lord, e.g., oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the Supreme Lord is uttered, oṁ is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature. These three words are taken from Vedic hymns. Oṁ ity etad brahmaṇo nediṣṭhaṁ nāma indicates the first goal. Then tat tvam asi ( Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.8.7) indicates the second goal. And sad eva saumya ( Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.1) indicates the third goal. Combined they become oṁ tat sat. Formerly when Brahmā, the first created living entity, performed sacrifices, he indicated by these three words the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the same principle has always been followed by disciplic succession. So this hymn has great significance. Bhagavad-gītā recommends, therefore, that any work done should be done for oṁ tat sat, or for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one performs penance, charity and sacrifice with these three words, he is acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a scientific execution of transcendental activities which enables one to return home, back to Godhead. There is no loss of energy in acting in such a transcendental way.