Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
mātrāsparśāstu kaunteya śītoṣṇasukhaduḥkhadāḥ .
āgamāpāyino.anityāstāṃstitikṣasva bhārata

Word Meanings:
मात्रास्पर्शाः - contacts of senses with
तु - indeed
कौन्तेय - O Kaunteya
शीतोष्णसुखदुःखदाः - producers of cold and
आगमापायिनः - with beginning and end
अनित्याः - impermanent
तान् - them
तितिक्षस्व - bear
भारत - O Bharata.

Life Application:
Endure temporary discomforts like heat, cold, praise, or criticism today without letting them disrupt your inner balance.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O son of Kunti, the union of the senses and their objects, which gives cold, heat, pleasure and pain, has a beginning and an end; they are impermanent, therefore, O Bharata, endure them.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The contacts of the senses with the objects, O son of Kunti, which cause heat and cold, pleasure and pain, have a beginning and an end; they are impermanent; endure them bravely, O Arjuna.

मात्रास्पर्शाः contacts of senses with objects? तु indeed? कौन्तेय O Kaunteya (son of Kunti)? शीतोष्णसुखदुःखदाः producers of cold and heat? pleasure and pain? आगमापायिनः with beginning and end? अनित्याः impermanent? तान् them? तितिक्षस्व bear (thou)? भारत O Bharata.Commentary -- Cold is pleasant at one time and painful at another. Heat is pleasant in winter but painful in summer. The same object that gives pleasure at one time gives pain at another time. So the sensecontacts that give rise to the sensations of heat and cold? pleasure and pain come and go. Therefore? they are impermanent in nature. The objects come in contact with the senses or the Indriyas? viz.? skin? ear? eye? nose? etc.? and the sensations are carried by the nerves to the mind which has its seat in the brain. It is the mind that feels pleasure and pain. One should try to bear patiently heat and cold? pleasure and pain and develop a balanced state of mind. (Cf.V.22)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Those external relations which bring cold and heat, pain and happiness, they come and go; they are not permanent. Endure them bravely, O Prince!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
According to the Vedantic process of perception, knowledge of external objects comes through the senses. The senses are merely instruments through which the individual (jiva) grasps and knows objects; without the jiva, the senses alone cannot produce knowledge of objects.

It is well known that the very same object can give two different persons entirely different experiences. The reason for this difference lies in the difference between the mental make-up of the two individuals.

It is also observed that an object which was once extremely dear to a person becomes, at another stage of life, unwelcome to the very same person -- because as time passes, changes also occur in his mind. In short, it is clear that any experience whatsoever becomes possible only when there is contact, through the senses, between ourselves and external objects.

A person who understands that the things of this world are ever-changing, constantly arising and perishing, will never allow himself to be disturbed on their account. In the flow of time, future events assume the form of the present, and after granting us various experiences they are ceaselessly gathered into the past. Nothing in this world can remain even for a moment without undergoing change. Change alone is the one unchanging law here.

Understanding this law, the wise man has no cause for grief whether things having a beginning and an end come or go. Cold and heat, success and failure, pleasure and pain -- none of these is permanent. This being the state of things, to be agitated or worried over every changing circumstance is itself a mark of ignorance. One who...

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O son of Kunti !  But the touches with the matras cause the [feelings of] cold and heat,  pleasure and pain; they are of the nature of coming and going and are transient.  Forbear them,  O Descendent of Bharata !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The contact of senses with their objects, O Arjuna, gives rise to feelings of cold and heat, pleasure and pain. They come and go, never lasing long. Endure them, O Arjuna.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
But the contacts of the organs with the objects are the producers of cold and heat, happiness and sorrow. They have a beginning and an end, (and) are transient. Bear them, O descendant of Bharata.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
If the objection arises, 'how can there be no grief in the absence of realization of the Self,' he says -- 'Matra-sparshah': objects, which are 'measured,' are called Matras; their contact, i.e. their relation, is precisely what gives cold, heat, pleasure and pain. It is only through the body's relation with cold, heat and the like that the Self experiences cold, heat, and so pleasure and sorrow. Sorrow does not belong to the Self of its own accord, since it comes and goes -- if it belonged to the Self intrinsically, it would persist even in deep sleep. Hence, since these sense-contacts exist only in the waking state and the like, and not otherwise, by this correlation of presence and absence they are shown to be caused by those states alone, not intrinsic to the Self. And the Self has no relation to them other than that of knower and known. Nor, though they come and go, do they have any eternality even in the sense of a continuous stream, since they are absent in deep sleep and cosmic dissolution -- hence they are called impermanent. Therefore, it is only the delusion identifying the Self with the body and the like that is the cause of sorrow; one freed from this delusion feels no sorrow even at the death of kinsmen. Therefore, abandoning this false identification, endure that cold, heat, and so on.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Though the Self's eternality is established by scripture and the like, one might still object that even without grief and delusion arising from its origination and destruction, grief and delusion might arise in some other way -- anticipating this doubt, he brings down this verse in answer. The delusion observed on the occasion of experiencing cold, heat, pleasure and pain is described here as an everyday matter, known through positive and negative concomitance. The qualification 'titikshu' (one who endures), 'having composed himself' as scripture says, teaches endurance here. 'Matra' denotes the sense-object, and 'sparsha' their contact. Cold is sometimes pleasant, sometimes painful, hence cold and heat are mentioned separately from pleasure and pain, to indicate the favorable and unfavorable conditions subsumed within them. Even though the contact of senses and objects is ever present in the Self, the joy and sorrow arising from cold and the rest do not touch the Self -- this is clarified in the latter half of the verse. Here the two vocatives 'Kaunteya' and 'Bharata' indicate that Arjuna, being of pure lineage on both sides, is fit to receive this knowledge.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O son of Kunti! The objects (material things) that are the domain of the senses give pleasure and pain through cold (favorable) and heat (unfavorable), and they come and go, being impermanent. O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna! Endure them.

Explanation -- One might wonder: verses 11-13 before, and 16-30 after, all deal with the topic of the embodied self and the body; how then do these two verses on 'sense-contact' (matra-sparsha) come in between, apart from that topic? The answer is that just as in verse 12 the Lord, to explain the eternal nature of all beings, placed Himself in their very ranks by saying 'there was never a time when I was not,' so too here, to describe mere material objects like the body as impermanent, perishable and changing, the Lord speaks of 'sense-contact.'

'Tu' -- this word is used here to distinguish the impermanent things like the body from the eternal reality.

'Matra-sparshah' -- the senses and the inner faculty (antahkarana), the instruments by which measuring, i.e. knowing, occurs, are called 'matra.' Their contact with objects is called 'sparsha.' Hence 'matra-sparshah' means the mere material objects of creation that are known through the senses and inner faculty.

Why should only the objects be meant here, and not their relation? If we take only the relation as meant, then that relation cannot be called 'agamapayinah' (coming and going), because acceptance of the relation occurs not in the inner faculty alone but in oneself; and since the self is eternal, this acceptance...

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
As sound, touch, form, taste and smell with their bases, are the effects of subtle elements (Tanmatras), they are called Matras. The contact with these through the ear and other senses gives rise to feelings of pleasure and pain, in the form of heat and cold, softness and hardness. The words 'cold and heat' illustrate other sensations too. Endure these with courage till you have discharged your duties as prescribed by the scriptures. The brave must endure them patiently, as they 'come and go'. They are transient. When the Karmas, which cause bondage, are destroyed, this 'coming and going' will end.

The Lord now explains the purpose of this endurance:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
He states two meanings together, in 'Na hi...' and the rest: 'I indeed was never non-existent, but always existed; so too you, and these kings.' If, upon a further change of appearance, grievability were to be admitted, then why is there no grief in attaining youth from childhood? He who is steadfast does not grieve. And such steadfastness, for one who has no attachment even to this present body, is easily attained. Therefore, seek steadfastness.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
'In the case of a man who knows that the Self is eternal, although there is no possibility of delusion concerning the destruction of the Self, still delusion, as of ordinary people, caused by the experience of cold, heat, happiness and sorrow is noticed in him. Delusion arises from being deprived of happiness, and sorrow arises from contact with pain etc.' apprehending this kind of a talk from Arjuna, the Lord said, 'But the contacts of the organs,' etc.
Matra-sparsah, the contacts of the organs with objects; are sita-usna-sukha-duhkha-dah, producers of cold, heat, happiness and sorrow. Matrah means those by which are marked off (measured up) sounds etc., i.e. the organs of hearing etc. The sparsah, contacts, of the organs with sound etc. are matra-sparsah. Or, sparsah means those which are contacted, i.e. objects, viz sound etc. Matra-sparsah, the organs and objects, are the producers of cold, heat, happiness and sorrow.
Cold sometimes produces pleasure, and sometimes pain. Similarly the nature of heat, too, is unpredictable. On the other hand, happiness and sorrow have definite natures since they do not change. Hence they are mentioned separately from cold and heat. Since they, the organs, the contacts, etc., agamapayinah, have a beginning and an end, are by nature subject to origination and destruction; therefore, they are anityah, transient. Hence, titiksasva, bear; tan, them  cold, heart, etc., i.e. do not be happy or sorry with regard to them.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
He raises grief in yet another way -- 'yadyapi' (although). Although grief over the loss of kinsmen might seem unwarranted, since it is not truly the Self that is lost -- for even upon loss of the body a substitute (a new body) is obtained -- still, at their death, I myself will suffer loss of pleasure and gain of pain: with this thought, grief has arisen in me. How so? Because of the absence of seeing them, and the like. Seeing, touching, conversing with loved ones is a cause of pleasure; at their death, the absence of such seeing causes loss of pleasure, and seeing them cut down and wounded causes gain of pain -- refuting precisely this notion, he brings down the verse. 'Matra' means the senses, by which objects are measured; 'sparsha' means their contact with objects. The words 'cold' and 'heat' are given merely as illustration. The sense here is that sense-contacts do not by themselves produce cold, heat, pleasure and pain, but only together with false identification (abhimana) -- this occurs only to one possessed of such identification, in waking and dream, not in dreamless sleep and the like, where such identification is absent. This establishes that the capacity of sense-contacts to produce cold, heat, pleasure and pain follows the presence and absence of false identification. For this very reason they are transient and impermanent -- therefore endure them.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
If the objection arises that steadfastness itself will not come, since 'how shall I remain free of delusion,' he states the means of attaining it -- 'Matra-sparshah': 'matra' means objects such as form and the rest; their 'sparsha,' contact, is their conjunction with the senses, these being the pairs cold-heat and the like. They are 'agamapayinah' and 'anityah,' coming and going and impermanent -- endure precisely these. Endurance of everything is indeed essential in both Sankhya and Yoga; hence the steadfast man is not deluded.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
We do not dispute the Self's eternality and all-pervasiveness, but we do not accept that there is one and the same Self in every body. Thus the Vaisheshikas hold that Selves, possessed of nine special qualities named cognition, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, effort, merit and demerit, are distinct in each body, though still eternal and all-pervasive. The logicians and Mimamsakas too hold this same view. The Sankhyas, though differing otherwise, do not dispute the Self's possession of qualities nor its distinctness in each body, since otherwise pleasure, pain and the rest would become confounded across selves. Thus, even though I am eternal and all-pervasive as distinct from Bhishma and the rest, since I too am subject to pleasure and pain, the severance of the bodies of kinsmen like Bhishma would cause loss of pleasure and onset of pain -- so why should grief and delusion be improper? Anticipating this thought of Arjuna's, he speaks, in order to distinguish the subtle body from the Self: 'matra,' that by which objects are measured, means the senses; their 'sparsha,' contact with objects, or the transformations of the inner faculty (antahkarana) taking the form of those objects, being subject to origination and destruction, produce pleasure and pain through cold, heat and the rest only for the inner faculty which is itself subject to arising and ceasing -- not for the eternal, all-pervasive Self, since it is without qualities and without modification. It is not possible for the eternal to be the substrate of impermanent attributes, since substance and attribute being non-different, no further relation could obtain; nor can the witnessed attribute belong to the witness. As is said: 'without undergoing modification, who could be the sorrowful witness of modification? I, the witness of a thousand modifications of the intellect, remain unmodified.' Thus, since all such arrangements are fully accounted for merely by the difference in the inner faculty, which is the substrate of pleasure, pain and the rest, there is no proof of difference in the unmodified, all-illuminating Self, since it pervades everywhere in the form of pure being and pure consciousness. Cold, heat, pleasure and pain are seen to be sometimes a cause of pleasure and sometimes of pain -- hence cold and heat are mentioned to represent the threefold pain and pleasure (from oneself, from other beings, and from providence), whereas pleasure and pain themselves never invert -- hence they are mentioned separately. Therefore endure these utterly unsteady sense-contacts, distinct from you, which are subject to modification and give rise to pleasure and pain through the union and separation of bodies such as Bhishma's; disregard them with discernment, knowing that they can do nothing to you. Do not, through false identification with the sorrowful body, consider yourself sorrowful. The two vocatives 'Kaunteya' and 'Bharata' indicate that, being pure on both sides of your lineage, this ignorance of yours is unbecoming.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
If one should say, 'I do not grieve for the dead and the yet-unborn, but rather for the Self, which suffers from separation from loved ones and the like,' he answers this, in 'Matra-sparshah': the functions of the senses, by which objects are known, are 'matra'; their contact with objects is precisely what produces cold, heat and the rest. Being subject to coming and going, they are impermanent and unstable, hence endure them. Just as contact with water, sunshine and the like naturally produces cold or heat according to the season, so too the union and separation of desired things produces pleasure and pain; and since these are unstable, it is fitting for the steadfast man merely to endure them, not to be enslaved to joy and sorrow on their account.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Anticipating the objection that, though the Self's eternality precludes grief and delusion caused by its destruction, grief and delusion arising from loss of pleasure, onset of pain, and experience of cold and the rest are nevertheless unavoidable, he answers, in 'Matra-sparshah': 'matra,' that by which objects are measured, means the senses; their 'sparsha,' contact, with objects, is their conjunction. Or, 'sparsha' means that which is touched, i.e. the objects themselves; both together, matra and sparsha, produce cold, heat, pleasure and pain. From the contact of the skin-sense and its objects, cold, heat, pleasure and pain arise, sometimes unpredictably; with this in mind, cold and heat, being unpredictable, are mentioned separately from the more predictable pleasure and pain. Since these are subject to origination and destruction, they are impermanent -- hence endure them, without joy or sorrow on their account. Here the two vocatives 'Kaunteya' and 'Bharata,' indicating purity of lineage on both sides, signify Arjuna's fitness for steadfastness and for this knowledge.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Though the point of the Self's eternality was already settled at the conclusion of the previous topic, it is stated again here immediately, owing to its exceptional importance -- he says, 'this point, right after.' The senses of hearing and the rest, by which sounds and the like are measured, are 'matra' -- this is stated, in refutation of Shankara's and others' construal, to clarify the meaning of the word 'matra': 'shabda...' 'Sasraya,' with their substrate, means that it is the substance qualified by the property that is properly the effect of the subtle element (tanmatra) -- this is the sense of 'being the effect of the subtle elements.' That the subtle elements themselves are denoted by the word 'matra' is not in dispute, since usages like 'shabda-matra,' 'sparsha-matra' and the like are found; hence it follows that the substance which is their effect, being one substance with them, is also properly denoted by that word. Considering that it is the relation with the object itself that is the direct cause of pleasure and the rest, he indicates a further relatum for 'sparsha' (contact) and explains the compound: 'by the ear and the rest, their contacts...' He explains that the words 'cold' and 'heat' serve to represent other sensations too, and clarifies the compound: 'in the form of cold, heat, softness, harshness and the rest.' Since cold and heat have no place on the battlefield, one might ask why they are mentioned at all here -- he answers: 'the words cold and heat are for illustration,' the remaining sense being 'of falling weapons and the like.' Cold, heat and so forth are to be understood, as applicable, in their respective duties according to caste and stage of life. Drawing on the word 'dhairam' ('steadfast,' to be used later in 2.15) and 'dhirah tatra' ('the steadfast one, in that,' stated earlier in 2.13), he says: 'endure them with steadfastness.' Or, by the two words 'Kaunteya' and 'Bharata' here, it is indicated that steadfastness alone is fitting for one born in the line of the best of kshatriyas. Just as in austerities, sacrifices and the like, wind, sun, hunger, thirst, the slaying of sacrificial animals and so forth must be endured until the completion of that rite, so too here must the fall of weapons, the slaying of enemies and the like be endured. Hence, since the sorrows caused by contact with unavoidable sense-objects cannot be averted by grief, and grief here is futile, endurance alone is proper -- this is the sense. Here, patience (kshama) with respect to the portion of pleasure means non-elation through disregard; the reason for this too is precisely their coming-and-going nature. To avoid redundancy of the word 'impermanent,' he explains: 'bandha...' -- the word 'impermanent' here negates even permanence in the sense of an unbroken stream. If one were to read it, by word-division, as 'nityah' (eternal) in a weaker sense, implying merely that one must endure them owing to their being bound up with something eternal (the Self), this reading is feeble; moreover, since even this stream-experience is absent in liberation, there is no eternality here even in the sense of a continuous stream, is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
If one should object, 'though a new body will indeed be obtained hereafter, still, for some time, the pain of experience is unbearable, hence I grieve,' he answers, in 'Matra-sparshah': O Kaunteya, most affectionate one, the contact of the sense-functions with their objects is precisely what produces cold, heat, pleasure and pain. The sense here is this: contact with water, sunshine and the like, through the sense-function, produces cold and heat; likewise, union and separation with friends produce pleasure and pain. In union one feels pleasure, in separation, pain; one ought not to dwell on the pleasure and pain residing there, but rather, mindful of the friend's own happiness, simply endure it oneself -- this alone is proper and fitting, since these are not permanent, he says: 'agamapayinah,' they come and they go, hence they are impermanent; therefore endure them. The vocative 'Bharata' signifies that this is indeed fitting for you.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
If the objection arises that the Self, though distinct from the body, ought to perish along with the body's destruction, just as a sheath-maker perishes with the destruction of the sheath, he says, in 'Matra-sparshah': you, I, and all these are beginningless and endless, is the sense. The functions of the senses, by which objects are measured, are 'matra'; or, per the Kaushitaki Upanishad's well-known scheme, the ten cognitive matras (speech and the rest) and ten elemental matras (name and the rest), which are the objects grasped through the senses. Their mutual relation as object and subject is 'sparsha' -- this is one construction. Alternatively, 'matra' together with the knower (pramatr) constitutes 'sparsha,' i.e. the relation between object and sense; the word 'sparsha' is used in this sense elsewhere too. Thus the relation of the knower, through the means of knowledge, with the object known -- all of this, like cold and heat, being 'agamapayi,' subject to arising and ceasing, is impermanent, and, like cold and heat, produces pleasure and pain. Hence endure them. O Kaunteya, Bharata -- this address, indicating your noble lineage, signifies your steadfastness. The afflictions of being a knower and the like, being absent in deep sleep, deep meditation, spirit-possession and the like, and present only in waking and dream, though occasionally appearing in the Self, are, like the illusory snake in a rope, false, and hence do not truly belong to the Self as its own attributes. Whatever appears, on occasion, as non-different from something is superimposed on it there, as the snake on the rope; the knower and the rest likewise sometimes appear as non-different from the inner Self, and are hence established as false. Therefore the knower has, in reality, no relation whatsoever to the inner Self, since no real relation is possible between the real and the false. Still less is there any relation between the Self and the afflictions -- pain and the rest -- that belong to the knower. How, then, does the notion of being sorrowful arise with regard to the Self? We answer: through superimposed identification with this or that limiting adjunct. Hence sorrow seen in the waking state does not persist in dream, nor does what is seen in dream appear in the waking state. Scripture too says: 'he who sees there is untouched by merit and sin, for this Person is unattached.'

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O son of Kuntī, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed.

 In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate nonpermanent appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress. According to Vedic injunction, one has to take his bath early in the morning even during the month of Māgha (January-February). It is very cold at that time, but in spite of that a man who abides by the religious principles does not hesitate to take his bath. Similarly, a woman does not hesitate to cook in the kitchen in the months of May and June, the hottest part of the summer season. One has to execute his duty in spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is the religious principle of the kṣatriyas, and although one has to fight with some friend or relative, one should not deviate from his prescribed duty. One has to follow the prescribed rules and regulations of religious principles in order to rise up to the platform of knowledge, because by knowledge and devotion only can one liberate himself from the clutches of māyā (illusion). The two different names of address given to Arjuna are also significant. To address him as Kaunteya signifies his great blood relations from his mother’s side; and to address him as Bhārata signifies his greatness from his father’s side. From both sides he is supposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage brings responsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore, he cannot avoid fighting.