Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
na tu māṃ śakyase draṣṭumanenaiva svacakṣuṣā .
divyaṃ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ paśya me yogamaiśvaram

Word Meanings:
न - not
तु - but
माम् - Me
शक्यसे - you are able
द्रष्टुम् - to see
अनेन - with this
एव - even
स्वचक्षुषा - with own eyes
दिव्यम् - divine
ददामि - give
ते - thee
चक्षुः - the eye
पश्य - behold
मे - My
योगम् - Yoga
ऐश्वरम् - lordly.

Life Application:
Receive divine vision through grace, recognizing that physical eyes alone cannot behold the ultimate spiritual reality.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
But you cannot see Me with these eyes of yours; (therefore) I give you divine vision, by which you may behold My divine Yoga.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
But thou art not able to behold Me with these thine own eyes; I give thee the divine eye; behold My lordly Yoga.

न not? तु but? माम् Me? शक्यसे (thou) canst? द्रष्टुम् to see? अनेन with this? एव even? स्वचक्षुषा with own eyes? दिव्यम् divine? ददामि (I) give? ते (to) thee? चक्षुः the eye? पश्य behold? मे My? योगम् Yoga? ऐश्वरम् lordly.Commentary No fleshly eyes can behold Me in My Cosmic Form. One can see It through the divine eye or the eye of intuition. It should not be confused with seeing through the eye or the mind. It is an inner experience.Lord Krishna says to Arjuna I give thee the divine eye? by which you will be able to behold My sovereign form. By it see My marvellous power of Yoga.Anena With this the fleshly eye or the physical eye? the earthly eye. (Cf.VII.25IX.5X.7)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Yet since with mortal eyes thou canst not see Me, lo! I give thee the Divine Sight. See now the glory of My Sovereignty."

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
We have already explained that to see the one essence in the various things made of it is a relatively easy task; but, on the contrary, to see the many in the one essence requires a subtle intellect endowed with a right knowledge of philosophy. To read a poem only a knowledge of the alphabet is necessary; but to understand its subtle beauty, and to do a comparative study of it with other similar poems, needs a master-mind that has been well soaked in the joy of tasting the best literary creations. Similarly, to see the One in the many is the work of a heart soaked with faith, but to experience the many in the One we need, besides the heart, an educated intellect that has learnt to see for itself the logic of the philosophers. Only when the capacity to know and experience is developed does an educated intellect gain the special capability to perceive the extraordinary. Stating a well-known direct fact, the Lord says: 'You cannot see Me with these very eyes of yours; I give you the divine eye.' There are many commentators or critics who try to explain this divine eye by various ridiculous imaginations and impossible theories. From this it appears that these commentators have not well studied the style of Hindu scriptures and Upanishads. In all the Upanishads, directly or indirectly, it has been repeatedly emphasized that a person cannot perceive subtle objects through their organs of perception. The senses can only grasp the gross objects of the external world. In common parlance, when we say, 'Look at this idea', this seeing is not done with these two eyes. There, 'seeing' means intellectual comprehension, and the intellectual capacity to grasp such a subtle theme is called the 'divine eye'. This divine eye has been granted to Arjuna to behold the lordly Yoga of the Lord. By this Yoga, the entire universe is held as the form of the Lord. Prior to this, the mention of this Yoga power has already appeared in almost identical words at two different places. Now the scene changes. Sanjaya, sitting in the palace of Hastinapura, says to Dhritarashtra:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
But, you cannot see Me simply with this eye of yours [Hence],  I give you the divine eye.  [Now]  behold the Lordly form of   Mine.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
But you will not be able to see Me with your own eye. I give you a divine eye. Behold My Lordly Yoga!

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
But you are not able to see Me merely with this eye of yours. I grant you the supernatural eye; bhold My divine Yoga.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He restates what was said in the statement 'If you think (it is possible to be seen)', by saying 'But...'. He says: 'You are not able to see Me, who am manifested as the cosmos and unconditioned (infinite), with your own eyes', by saying 'Not indeed' (na tu). Anticipating the doubt, 'How then can I see You?', He says '[with the eye] by which...'. He shows the application of the divine eye in seeing the superabundance of the power of Yoga to be described later, by saying 'By that...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
But you cannot see Me with this eye of yours, i.e., with physical eyes; therefore, I give you divine eyes, so that you may behold My lordly power. Explanation: 'na tu mam sakyase drastumanenaiva svacaksusa' -- These physical eyes of yours have very little and limited power. Being material (prakrata), these physical eyes can only see the insignificant effects of nature, i.e., the forms of material humans, animals, birds, etc., their differences, and the forms of sunshine and shadow. But they cannot see My form which is beyond mind, intellect, and senses. 'divyam dadami te caksuh pasya me yogamaisvaram' -- I give you divine eyes endowed with the capability to see the super-sensory, extraordinary form; that is, I bestow divine power within these physical eyes of yours, so that you can see super-sensory, extraordinary objects and along with it also see their divinity. Although seeing divinity is not a subject of the eyes but of the intellect, yet the Lord says that with the divine eyes given by Him, you will be able to see the divinity, i.e., My lordly extraordinary influence. The implication is that to see My Cosmic Form, divine eyes are necessary. The verb 'pasya' (behold) has two meanings -- to see with the intellect (discrimination) and to see with the eyes. In the fifth verse of the ninth chapter, by saying 'pasya me yogamaisvaram', the Lord spoke of seeing (knowing) through the intellect. Now, here, by saying 'pasya me yogamaisvaram', He speaks of seeing with the eyes.

Special Point: For example, suppose 'Srimadbhagavadgita' is written somewhere. Those who have absolutely no knowledge of the alphabet see only black lines in it, and those who know the alphabet see letters in it. But one who is educated and has deeply contemplated the Gita, upon seeing the written word 'Srimadbhagavadgita', immediately begins to see all the chapters, verses, and teachings of the Gita. Similarly, when the Lord gave divine eyes to Arjuna, he started seeing the extraordinary Cosmic Form and its divinity, which is not a subject of ordinary intellect. All this capability belonged solely to the divine eye bestowed by the Lord. Now a doubt arises here: when Arjuna said in the fourth verse that if I am able to see Your Cosmic Form then please show it to me, in response to that, the Lord should have spoken this eighth verse saying that you cannot see My Cosmic Form with these physical eyes of yours, therefore I give you divine eyes. But the Lord did not say so there; instead, before giving the divine eyes, He repeatedly commanded him to see, saying 'Behold, behold!'. When Arjuna could not see, the Lord then explained the reason for his inability to see, and then resolved it by giving him divine eyes. Why then did the Lord take such a roundabout course? The Lord did this only to show how His grace progressively expands upon a seeker, for such is the very nature of the Lord. The Lord is extremely merciful. There is never an end to the grace of that ocean of mercy. He has wondrous ways of showing mercy to His devotees. For instance, first the Lord gave instruction to Arjuna. Through the instruction, He changed Arjuna's inner feelings and made him aware of His glories (vibhutis). Upon knowing those glories, a unique state arose in Arjuna, because of which he said to the Lord that he was not feeling satiated while listening to His nectar-like words. After describing His glories, the Lord finally said that infinite universes (with various kinds of glories) lie in a single fraction of His. Arjuna desired to see that Cosmic Form which has infinite universes in one of its fractions, and prayed for it. On this, the Lord showed His Cosmic Form and repeatedly commanded him to see it. But Arjuna could not see the Cosmic Form. Then the Lord bestowed divine eyes upon him. The summary is that the Lord Himself manifested the curiosity to see the Cosmic Form. Having manifested the curiosity, He expressed the desire to show it. Upon expressing the desire, He showed it. When Arjuna could not see, He fulfilled it by giving him divine eyes. The conclusion is that when one surrenders to the Lord, the Lord takes upon himself the entire responsibility of doing everything for the surrendered soul.

Relationship -- What kind of form of the Lord Arjuna saw after obtaining the divine eyes is described by Sanjaya to Dhritarashtra in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
I shall reveal to you the whole universe in one part of my body. But, with your physical eye, which can see only limited and conditioned things, you cannot behold Me, such as I am, different in  kind from everything else and illimitable. So I bestow on you, a divine, namely, supernatural, eye by which you may perceive Me. Behold My Lordly Yoga' (sovereign endowment)! Behold My unie Yoga (special power)! The meaning is, 'Behold My Yoga such as infinite knowledge and such other attributes and endless manifestations of lordly power!'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tu, but; na sakyase, you are not able; drastum, to see; mam, Me, who have assumed the Cosmic form; eva, merely; anena, with this natural; sva-caksusa, eye of yours. However, dadami, I grant; te, you; the divyam, supernatural; caksuh, eye, by which supernatural eye you shall be able to see Pasya, behold with that; me, My, God's aisvaram, divine; yogam, Yoga, i.e. the superabundance of the power of Yoga [The power of accomplishing the impossible.-M.S.].

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
With reference to what was said by Arjuna, 'If You think it is possible for me to see' (11.4), the Lord replies: 'But you cannot...'. With this physical eye of yours, which by rule only grasps limited objects, you cannot see Me who am of the form of imperishable sovereignty. Therefore, I give you a divine eye, which is a supernatural instrument of vision of the nature of knowledge. With that, behold and realize My lordly Yoga, which consists of all the different attributes inherent in My own nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Regarding what was said (by Arjuna): 'If You think it is possible to see' (11.4), the Lord states the specific point there by saying: 'But indeed not...'. With this very physical, natural eye of yours, you are not able to see Me who am of divine form. If the reading is 'shakshyase' (future tense), it means 'you will not be able'. The traditional view is that the root 'shak' (to be able) of the Bhvadi class takes the suffix 'shyan' of the Divadi class as a Vedic/scriptural exception, or it is a variant reading belonging to the Divadi class. Then, 'how can I see You?' To this, He says: 'Divine...'. I give you the divine eye, which is supernatural and capable of seeing My divine form. With that divine eye, behold My lordly Yoga, which is the superabundance of the capability to make the impossible possible (aghatana-ghatana-samarthya) and which is unique to Me, the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
With reference to what was said by Arjuna, 'If You think it is possible to see' (11.4), the Lord replies: 'But you cannot...'. With this physical/fleshly eye of yours, you are not able (or will not be able) to see Me. Therefore, I give you a divine, supernatural eye of the nature of knowledge. Behold My lordly, unique Yoga, which is the power to make the impossible possible (aghatita-ghatana-samarthya).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having spoken thus, seeing Arjuna who tried to see with his own eyes but could not see anything and therefore became dejected, the Lord said: 'Not indeed...'. You cannot see Me, the holder of the Cosmic Form, with this physical/material eye of yours. Then why did You say 'Behold'? Anticipating this, He replies: 'I give you a divine, supernatural eye capable of seeing the lordly form. With that eye, behold My lordly Yoga, which is the superabundance of power'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In the verse 'But you will not be able to see Me', the reason for the inability, indicated by the word 'tu' (but), is shown by drawing it from the previous verse, starting with 'I...'. The meaning intended by 'with this very...' is explained as 'limited...'. It is called 'physical' (material) because it is the opposite of 'divine'. By 'Me' (mām) in 'such as I am', etc., the possession of His divine form/personality is intended. Here, the word 'divine' means 'supernatural' (non-material). The phrase 'the means to perceive Me' is the result of its being supernatural. What is intended by the word 'lordly' (aiśvaram) is 'unique to Me'. The meaning of the word 'Yoga', supported by the word 'aiśvaram' and derived from the context, etc., is explained as 'infinite...'. Lordship is the power of ruling, and the Yoga associated with it is the union of qualities and glories (vibhūtis) suitable for it. Because of the divine nature of the eye, there is the perception of qualities such as knowledge, etc. The idea is that later, in verses like 'I see...' (11.15 etc.), he will describe seeing Him with attributes such as infinite heroism, etc.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Having spoken thus, to Arjuna who was ready to see, the Lord replies: 'But not...'. But indeed, you cannot see in this way, you are not able. Therefore, I give you a divine, supernatural eye. With that, which becomes your own eye through the glance of My grace, behold Me, the Purushottama. Therefore, by having seen Purushottama, with this eye itself, behold My lordly Yoga which is of the nature of the capability to do, undo, or do otherwise (karana-akarana-anyathakarana-samarthya). The idea is that without the knowledge and vision of the nature of Purushottama, the vision of the Cosmic Form (all-form) would not occur; and the vision of Purushottama happens through an extraordinary vision.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Regarding what was said, 'If You think it is possible for me to see' (11.4), the Lord replies: 'But not...'. 'Śakyase' means 'you are able' (śaknoṣi). The transposition of the conjugation class affix (pada-vikaraṇa-vyatyaya) is an archaic/Vedic usage (ārṣa). 'With this' means 'with this physical/material eye'. 'Divine' means 'supernatural'. 'Lordly' means 'relating to the Lord'. 'Yoga' means the power/capability characterized by being the refuge of the universe.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you divine eyes. Behold My mystic opulence!

 A pure devotee does not like to see Kṛṣṇa in any form except His form with two hands; a devotee must see His universal form by His grace, not with the mind but with spiritual eyes. To see the universal form of Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna is told not to change his mind but his vision. The universal form of Kṛṣṇa is not very important; that will be clear in subsequent verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted to see it, the Lord gives him the particular vision required to see that universal form. Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationship with Kṛṣṇa are attracted by loving features, not by a godless display of opulences. The playmates of Kṛṣṇa, the friends of Kṛṣṇa and the parents of Kṛṣṇa never want Kṛṣṇa to show His opulences. They are so immersed in pure love that they do not even know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In their loving exchange they forget that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated that the boys who play with Kṛṣṇa are all highly pious souls, and after many, many births they are able to play with Kṛṣṇa. Such boys do not know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They take Him as a personal friend. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī recites this verse: itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ “Here is the Supreme Person, who is considered the impersonal Brahman by great sages, the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotees, and a product of material nature by ordinary men. Now these boys, who have performed many, many pious activities in their past lives, are playing with that Supreme Personality of Godhead.” ( Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.12.11) The fact is that the devotee is not concerned with seeing the viśva-rūpa, the universal form, but Arjuna wanted to see it to substantiate Kṛṣṇa’s statements so that in the future people could understand that Kṛṣṇa not only theoretically or philosophically presented Himself as the Supreme but actually presented Himself as such to Arjuna. Arjuna must confirm this because Arjuna is the beginning of the paramparā system. Those who are actually interested in understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and who follow in the footsteps of Arjuna should understand that Kṛṣṇa not only theoretically presented Himself as the Supreme, but actually revealed Himself as the Supreme. The Lord gave Arjuna the necessary power to see His universal form because He knew that Arjuna did not particularly want to see it, as we have already explained.