Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
ya evaṃ vetti puruṣaṃ prakṛtiṃ ca guṇaiḥ saha .
sarvathā vartamāno.api na sa bhūyo.abhijāyate

Word Meanings:
यः - who
एवम् - thus
वेत्ति - knows
पुरुषम् - Purusha
प्रकृतिम् - Prakriti
च - and
गुणैः - by qualities
सह - with
सर्वथा - in all ways
वर्तमानः - living
अपि - also
न - not
सः - he
भूयः - again
अभिजायते - is born.

Life Application:
He who thus knows the spirit and material nature with its modes is not born again, no matter how he lives.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He who thus knows the Purusha (Spirit) and Prakriti (Nature) along with the Gunas (qualities), even though living in any manner (behaving in the world), is not born again.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He who thus knows the Spirit and Matter together with the alities, in whatever condition he may be, he is not born again.

यः who? एवम् thus? वेत्ति knows? पुरुषम् Purusha? प्रकृतिम् Prakriti? च and? गुणैः alities? सह with? सर्वथा in all ways? वर्तमानः living? अपि also? न not? सः he? भूयः again? अभिजायते is born.Commentary One who knows the Soul and Nature with its alities? whatever his conduct may be? frees himself from the cycle of births and deaths. Such is the advantage he gains from the discriminative knowledge of Spirit and Matter. He knows that he is eternal and changeless and that all changes are due to the modifications of Nature on account of its alities. The self through ignorance identifies itself with the body and suffers rirth.In whatsoever condition he may be? whether he is engaged in prescribed or forbidden acts (like Indra who killed the Purohita Visvarupa and many Sannyasins)? he is not born again? because the,actions (which are the seeds of rirth)? of one who knows the Spirit and Matter? who has gained the knowledge of the Self? are burnt by the fire of that knowledge. Just as the seeds that are fried in fire do not sprout again? so also the actions burnt in the fire of knowledge cannot produce new bodies or further births. In his case they are Karmabhasa (mere semblance of Karma). They are not effective causes and cannot produce further births. A burnt cloth cannot serve the purpose of the cloth.Those actions which are done with egoism and desire (expectation of fruits) will produce fruits or results. In the case of a wise man? the seeds of evil? viz.? ignorance? egoism? attachment? etc.? are burnt by the fire of knowledge. Therefore he cannot have rirths.The Karmas (Prarabdha) which have already started their operation by producing this present birth do not perish? notwithstanding the dawn of the knowledge of the Self. When an arrow is once sent out from a bow at a mark? it pierces the mark and continues to act till it falls to the ground when the full force with which it was dischared is exhausted. Even so the Prarabdha Karma which has given rise to the body continues to act till the inherent force is fully exhausted? although the sage has attained Selfrealisation through his body. But he is not in the least affected by this? because he has no identification with the body? and as he has identified himelf with Brahman or the Absolute. If a carbuncle or cancer arises in the body on account of Prarabdha Karma? he will not suffer a bit as he has risen above bodyconsciousness? and as he stands as a witness of his body. But a bystander or a spectator wrongly imagines that the liberated sage is also suffering like an ordinary worldly man. This is a serious and sad mistake. From the viewpoint of the liberated sage he has neither body nor Prarabdha Karma.An arrow that is placed ready on the bow but not discharged with force can be withdrawn. Similarly? the Karmas which have not begun to generate their fruits or effects can be neutralised or destroyed by the knowledge of the Self. Therefore it is proper to say that the liberated sage is not born again. He will not take another body when the body through which he attained knowledge perishes. As ignorance? the cause of this body? is destroyed by the knowledge of the Self? birth? the effect of ignorance? is also destroyed. As one takes birth through virtuous and vicious actions? a sage will not take birth as his virtuous and visiouc actions (the whole Sanchita or accumulated Karmas of his previous births) are destroyed by the knowledge of the Self. The Karmas done by him after he has attained Selfrealisation cannot touch him at all as he has neither egoism (agency) nor desires. (Cf.XIII.32)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
He who understands God and Nature along with her qualities, whatever be his condition in life, he comes not again to earth.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The summary of the discussion so far is that although the Purusha is ever-liberated in his true nature, due to identification with Prakriti, he becomes a Jiva and experiences the miseries of the world. Because of this identification, he has to take birth in various wombs according to the vasanas generated. However, the seeker who, being equipped with spiritual disciplines and by the teachings of the Guru, knows in essence the Prakriti, the Purusha, their mutual relationship, and the qualities of Prakriti that have various kinds of influences, is indeed a wise person who is liberated from the bondage of the world forever. To know anything completely, we must remain separate from it. If we ourselves are entangled in a situation, we cannot study it objectively. Therefore, to know the modifications of Prakriti (body, etc.) and its qualities (happiness, sorrow, etc.), we must stand as a witness to all of them, only then can we realize the Supreme Self, the substratum of all. To know this infinite Brahman as one's own Self means to destroy ignorance. There remains no reason for such a fully wise man to have a false identification with Prakriti again. Therefore, the Lord says here that even though living in any manner, he is not born again. This implies that even while performing actions in the world, the wise man does not fall into bondage by generating new vasanas like ordinary human beings, because his ego is completely destroyed. 'The knower of Brahman becomes Brahman itself' and all his actions are destroyed—this is the truth propounded by all the Upanishads. Now, the Lord describes various methods for Self-realization:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
He who knows, in this manner, the Soul and the Material Cause together with Strands-he is not born again, even though he behaves in different ways.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who understands the self and the Prakrti thus with the Gunas is not born again, in whatever state he may be placed.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
He who knows thus the Person and Nature along with the alities will not be born again, in whatever way he may live.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
With "The object of knowledge..." etc., the meaning of 'Tat' (That) and 'Tvam' (Thou) were clarified immediately after, and their oneness was declared in "And know Me also as the knower of the field (Kshetrajna)". Now, Sri Krishna explains the means to attain that vision according to the qualifications of the seekers. Here (in this context):
- Sri Shankara asks what is the nature of the practice called meditation: "What is meditation?" Speaking of its nature, he replies: "Withdrawing [the senses] from sound etc." The connection is: "by withdrawing with one-pointedness." The contemplation that takes place on the inner consciousness is connected to the previous statement. When it is asked what that contemplation is, he elaborates on meditation by citing examples and scriptures: "Likewise..." meaning, in accordance with the intended meditation. "They perceive the Self..." as the Supreme Self, is the remaining portion. "Some" refers to the highest class of qualified seekers.
- He points out the middle class of qualified seekers: "Others..." When it is asked what the means called Sankhya is, he says it is the knowledge born of inquiry; that very knowledge, being similar to Yoga due to its causal nature, is referred to as Yoga: "Sankhya..."
- He mentions the lowest class of qualified seekers: "Karma..." Since there is concentration of mind (Yoga) through action which is the cause of purification, therefore action is figuratively called Yoga: "by its qualities." "Others perceive the Self by the Self" is understood as before, and he says: "By that (action)..."

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
In this way, the person who knows the Purusha (Spirit) and Prakriti (Nature) along with its qualities as distinct from each other, even while performing all kinds of activities, is not born again.

Commentary — 'ya evam vetti ... na sa bhuyo'bhijayate' — In the preceding verse, through the words 'dehe'smin purusah parah', the Spirit (Purusha) has been declared as transcendental to the body, i.e., free from any connection with it. The same is referred to here by the word 'evam' (thus) — that the seeker who realizes the Purusha as transcendental to the body and Prakriti, i.e., completely disconnected, and understands in reality that whatever world is perceived in the form of modifications, effects, instruments (senses), and objects is all the work of Prakriti and its qualities, does not attain rebirth, even while performing duties appropriate to one's varna, ashrama, and circumstances. This is because attachment to the qualities of nature (Gunas) is the cause of birth (Gita 13.21).

Here, the words 'sarvatha vartamano'pi' (even while behaving in any manner) should not be taken to mean forbidden conduct, because for one who experiences oneself as free from the connection with the body and experiences Prakriti with its qualities as separate from oneself, the desire for transient objects cannot arise. In the absence of desire, it is impossible for forbidden actions to be performed by him, because desire is the sole cause of forbidden conduct (Gita 3.37).

Here, the Lord cautions the seeker to know his real nature, so that he may understand clearly that, in reality, there is no action in the Self. Therefore, he is not the performer (doer) of any action, and not being the doer, he is also not the enjoyer (experiencer). When the seeker realizes himself as the non-doer, his pride of doership automatically disappears, and he has no attachment to the fruits of actions. Even so, scripturally ordained actions continue to occur through him naturally. Being transcendental to the qualities (Gunas), he does not attain rebirth.

Connection — In the preceding verse, the Lord explained that the true knowledge of Prakriti and Purusha is the cause of freedom from birth and death. Now, the question arises whether there is any other way to be freed from birth and death. To answer this, the Lord describes four means in the next two verses.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
He who 'understands', namely, knows truly with discrimination, the self to be thus, and also the Prakrti as having the aforesaid nature along with Sattva and other Gunas, whose nature will be later examined, is never born again, i.e., is never rorn conjointly with Prakrti again in 'whatever state he may be placed,' i.e., in whatever painful condition he may be placed in the bodies of divinities, men etc. The meaning is that at the time when the body ceases to exist, the self will attain the purified state characterised by boundless knowledge devoid of evil.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Ya evam etc.  a men of  Yoga who knows the Material Cause, the Soul, the Strands  and their modifications in this manner i.e., by means of  this above mentioned Brahman-perception which  is in the form  'All are identical with  It' - he is certainly emancipated eventhough he behaves in different ways i.e., in whatever manner [he chooses].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sah yah, he who; vetti, knows, in the manner described; the purusam, Person, that Self possessed of the characteristics stated above, as 'I myself (am That)'; and knows prakrtim, Nature as described above, which is characterized as ignorance; to have been eradicated by Knowledge, saha, along with; gunaih, the alities which are its modifications; na abhijayate, will not be born; bhuyah, again-after the fall of this body of the man of realization, he does not become born again for (taking) another body, i.e. he does not take up another body; sarvatha api, in whatever way; vartamanah, he may live. From the word api it is understood that, it goes without saying that one who is firm in his own duty is not rorn.
Objection: Though it has been said that there is absence of rirth after the dawn of Knowledge, still is not illogical that actions done (in the present life) before the rise of Knowledge and those done subseently, as also those done in the many past lives, should be destroyed without yielding their results? Hence there should be three births! For destruction of acired merit is not logical, to the same extent as actions that have produced the present birth and are yielding their proper results (cannot be destroyed). Besides, it is not understood that actions have distinctions [Since all actions arise from ignorance, they are on the same level so far so they are opposed to Knowledge; i.e., there can be no such distinction among actions as 'those which have started yielding results' and 'those that have not'.]. Therefore, the actions of the three kinds, without exception, will produce three births or they all collectively will produce one birth. Otherwise, if the acired merits become destroyed, it will lead to loss of faith everywhere as well as to the purposelessness of scriptures. Therefore it has been illogical to say, 'he will not be born again.'
Reply: No, for the burning away of all the actions of the man of knowledge has been stated in hundreds of Upanisadic texts such as:
'And all one's actions become dissipated' (Mu. 2.2.8);
'Anyone who knows (that supreme) Brahman, becomes Brahman' (op. cit. 3.2.9);
'For him the delay is for so long only (as he does not become freed)' (Ch. 6.14.2); 
'As the fibres at the tip of a blade of reed (become completely burnt৷৷.,' so) all actions 'get completely burnt' (op. cit. 5.24.3).
Here too the burning of all actions has been stated in, 'as a blazing fire reduces pieces of wood to ashes,৷৷.'etc. (4.37), and He will also say so (later) [See 18.66: 'I shall free you from all sins,' etc.-Tr.].
This accords with reason also. Verily, actions, which arise from the seed of evils [Klesas, evils-see note under 8.19-Tr.] like ignorance and desires, germinate the sprout of rirth. Here also it has been said by the Lord in various places that actions which are associated with egoism and desire for results bear fruits, not the others. And there is also the verse: 'As seeds burnt by fire do not germinate, so also the Self does not acire another body due to evils that have been burnt by Knowledge (cf. Mbh. Va. 199. 107).
Objection: It may be granted for the present that actions performed after the rise of Knowledge are burnt by Knowledge, since they coexist with Knowledge. But the burning away of actions done in this life prior to the rise of Knowledge and those done in the many past lives is not reasonable.
Reply: No, because of the alification, 'all actions' (4.37).
Objection: May it not be that 'all actions' means those that are undertaken after Illumination?
Reply: No, for there is no reason for the restriction (of the meaning). On the other hand, as for the statement, 'just as actions that have produced the present birth and are already active in producing their results do not get dissipated even after Illumination, similarly it is not reasonable that actions which have not commenced producing their results should get dissipated,'-that is wrong.
Objection: Why?
Reply: Since they have already begun producing results, like an arrow that has been shot: As an arrow, freed earlier from a bow for hitting a target, even after piercing through the target comes to a stop only after falling down as a result of the dissipation of its initial momentum, similarly, actions that produced the (present) body verily continue, even after fulfilling the purpose of maintaining the body, to exist as before until the dissipation of their inherent tendencies. But, as that very arrow, when it has not acired the momentum, needed for action, when it has not been shot even though fixed on the bow, can be withdrawn, similarly, actions which have not begun yielding their results may be rendered unproductive by Knowledge, even while existing in their receptacle. [The internal organ bearing the reflection of Consciousness.] Hence, it is established that , it has been reasonable to state that on the fall of the present body of an enlightened person, 'He is not born again.'
Here are being presented these meditation etc. which are the alternative means for the realization of the Self:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Thus, "who he is and what his powers are" has been explained. Now, the Lord concludes what was stated earlier as "knowing which one attains immortality" with: "He who...". He who knows the Purusha (Spirit) in the manner described, realizing "I am He," and knows Prakriti (Nature) as ignorance along with its qualities (modifications) to be false and sublated by Self-knowledge, realizing "my ignorance and its effects have ceased"—he, even though living in any manner, such as transgressing rules due to the force of Prarabdha Karma like Indra, is not born again. Upon the fall of this body of the man of knowledge, he does not take up another body, because it has been stated in many ways that when ignorance is destroyed by knowledge, its effects cannot arise, as established by the rule: "On attaining That (Brahman), there is non-clinging and destruction of subsequent and previous sins respectively, because it is so declared (by scriptures)" (Brahma Sutras 4.1.13). By the word 'api' (even), it is implied: what need is there to say that one who remains established in his own duty is not born again?

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Thus, the Lord praises the one who possesses the discriminative knowledge of Prakriti and Purusha: "He who...". He who knows the Purusha (Spirit) thus as the witness etc., and knows Prakriti (Nature) along with its qualities which result in pleasure, pain, etc.—that person, even though living in any manner, even transgressing rules, is not born again. It means he is surely liberated.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
"And know Me also as the knower of the field (Kshetrajna)"—having thus explained and concluded the reality of the Self, the Lord now praises the knowledge of the reality of the Self, which is the oneness of the pure individual soul and the Supreme Soul, by declaring its fruit: "He who...". He who thus, in the manner described, knows the Purusha (Spirit) which is the substratum of all projections such as Jiva and Ishvara, directly realizing "I am that Purusha of such characteristics," and knows Prakriti (Nature) which is beginningless, indescribable, and the limiting adjunct (upadhi) of all miseries, along with its qualities (modifications), to be eradicated (brought to non-existence) by the knowledge (vidya) which perceives the aforementioned oneness—he, even though living in any manner, even transgressing the rules of varna and ashrama, is not born again upon the fall of this body, i.e., he does not take another birth. The interpretation of some that 'avartamanah' (even if he is born again, he is not born again) is outside the commentary and not to be accepted, as such an interpretation leads to no meaningful result.
It has been stated in the Shruti and Smriti texts, accompanied by reasoning, that when the seeds of karma, which arise from ignorance, desire, and affliction, and which have the capacity to produce the sprouts of future births, are burnt by the fire of knowledge, they lose the capacity to sprout again. Keeping this absence of rebirth for the wise in mind, the Lord says: "he is not born again." By this, the objection is refuted that it is unreasonable for karmas performed prior to the dawn of knowledge, those performed subsequently, and those accumulated over many past lives, to be destroyed without yielding their fruits (like Prarabdha Karma), based on statements like "Karmas do not perish even after hundreds of millions of eons without being experienced." Otherwise (if we assume they don't perish), those three kinds of karmas would produce three births, or collectively they would produce one birth; and if they perish without being experienced, it would lead to a lack of faith everywhere and render scriptures useless. This objection is refuted because of the specific qualification "all karmas" (being burnt by the fire of knowledge), which makes the destruction of all karmas reasonable. If it is argued that only those karmas undertaken after the dawn of knowledge are burnt because they coexist with knowledge, and thus the qualification is not useless, it is not so, because there is no reason to restrict the meaning. Since Prarabdha Karma has already begun yielding results (like a shot arrow), the same cannot be said of other karmas whose momentum has not commenced. Therefore, it is established that upon the fall of this body of the wise person, he is not born again.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Now, in order to describe the method of meditating on discrimination, the fruit thereof is first shown in this verse "He who..." to generate great interest. The pronoun 'enam' (him) refers to the previously described distinct nature of the Self, hence the commentator says "as possessing the aforementioned nature." Since Prakriti was also described earlier, the pronoun 'enam' (her) is converted by grammatical modification, hence the commentator says "as possessing the aforementioned nature." As for the qualities (Gunas), only a brief introduction was given earlier, and their elaborate discussion will be in the fourteenth chapter, hence the commentator says "along with the qualities whose nature will be described later." Since Prakriti and Purusha are primary and the qualities are secondary, it is said "along with qualities." Although the qualities are mentioned together with Prakriti and Purusha, the word 'guna' here refers only to the qualities of Prakriti described before and after; to make this clear, the commentator says "Sattva and others."
To remove the doubt that knowing Prakriti along with its qualities might lead to an impure knowledge, the commentator explains the meaning of "knows him" as "knows with proper discrimination." To remove the doubt of behaving contrary to scriptures, the word "sarvatha" (in all ways) implies the various painful states opposing Yoga caused by contact with different bodies, hence the commentator says "in the bodies of divinities, men, etc." The meaning is that even though the knower of truth experiences temporary pain due to Prarabdha Karma, his rebirth cannot be inferred in the same way as that of ordinary men. The word 'api' (even) indicates a fortiori argument for those who are in peaceful states.
The birth and death of the Self's own nature is denied by scriptural texts like "He is not born, nor does He die" (Katha Upanishad 1.2.18); therefore, since there is no possibility of that here and the word 'bhuyah' (again) would not connect with it, what is denied here is the contact with bodies referred to in "birth in good and evil wombs" (Gita 13.22), hence the commentator says "is never born conjointly with Prakriti again." Even though there is a potential for contact with a body after death in states like cosmic dissolution, in the case of the knower, since his karmas are burnt by the fire of knowledge, even that potential does not exist; to convey this, the word "arhati" (deserves/has capability) is used. Showing this lack of capability and the removal of undesirable rebirth, the commentator mentions the attainment of the desired goal up to its completion: "unbounded knowledge devoid of evil." Since ignorance and karma are completely destroyed, there is no potential for contact with a body; to convey this, the two adjectives "characterised by boundless knowledge" and "devoid of evil" are used. The meaning of the word 'bhuyah' (again) is shown as "at the time when the body ceases to exist."

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus translating, the commentator describes the absence of worldly existence for such a knower: "He who...". He who knows the Purusha (Spirit) and Prakriti (Nature) along with the Gunas (qualities) as the forms of God in the manner described, and knowing this, behaves in any manner, is not born again, i.e., he is not born in the cycle of worldly existence. Instead, he becomes surely liberated.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Thus, the commentator states the fruit of the knowledge of the Self having the aforementioned characteristics: "He who...". Even though living in any manner, performing actions prescribed or forbidden along with the qualities (which are modifications of Nature), he is not born again, i.e., he does not attain rebirth, but becomes liberated.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the living entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure to attain liberation. He will not take birth here again, regardless of his present position.

 Clear understanding of material nature, the Supersoul, the individual soul and their interrelation makes one eligible to become liberated and turn to the spiritual atmosphere without being forced to return to this material nature. This is the result of knowledge. The purpose of knowledge is to understand distinctly that the living entity has by chance fallen into this material existence. By his personal endeavor in association with authorities, saintly persons and a spiritual master, he has to understand his position and then revert to spiritual consciousness or Kṛṣṇa consciousness by understanding Bhagavad-gītā as it is explained by the Personality of Godhead. Then it is certain that he will never come again into this material existence; he will be transferred into the spiritual world for a blissful eternal life of knowledge.