Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
teṣāṃ satatayuktānāṃ bhajatāṃ prītipūrvakam .
dadāmi buddhiyogaṃ taṃ yena māmupayānti te

Word Meanings:
तेषां - to them
सततयुक्तानां - constantly devoted
भजतां - worshiping
प्रीतिपूर्वकम् - with love
ददामि - give
बुद्धियोगं - yoga of intellect
तं - that
येन - by whom
मामुपयान्ति - they attain Me
ते - they

Life Application:
To those ever-steadfast, worshipping with love, God grants the yoga of wisdom by which they reach the Supreme.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
To those who are ever steadfast and worship Me with love, I grant that Yoga of wisdom (buddhi-yoga) by which they attain Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
To them who are ever steadfast, worshipping Me with love, I give the Yoga of discrimination by which they come unto Me.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
When a seeker continuously and lovingly meditates upon the Supreme, the Lord grants him 'Buddhi-yoga' (intuitive wisdom and right understanding), by means of which he reaches the Divine.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
To those who are constantly united, worshipping Me with love, I give that Yoga of wisdom by which they reach Me.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
To those who are constantly devoted, worshipping Me with love, I give that Yoga of understanding by which they come to Me.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
To them who are ever steadfast, worshipping Me with love, I give that Yoga of wisdom by which they reach Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya states: The Lord declares that He alone is the creator (prabhava) of this universe, and by His command alone everything moves. Realizing this truth, selfless devotees meditate on and worship Him with pure love.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandagiri states: To those who worship God with unselfish love and constant devotion, the Lord grants 'Buddhi-yoga' (the vision of true wisdom), which destroys their ignorance and brings them unto Himself.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
To those who are constantly devoted to Me and worship Me with love, I grant that Yoga of wisdom by which they attain Me alone.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Sri Ramanuja states: To those who desire constant union with Me and worship Me with love, I grant that matured 'Buddhi-yoga' (the refined vision of devotion) by which they attain My direct communion.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta states: The great sages, Kumaras, and Manus govern the cosmic order solely through the will and power of the Supreme Lord. Enlightening one another regarding the Lord's divine glory, these enlightened souls abide in supreme bliss.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Shankaracharya states: To those who are ever steadfast, free from external desires, and worship Me with love, I grant that 'Buddhi-yoga' (the intuitive wisdom of Right Knowledge), by which they attain My real Self.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha states: The Supreme Lord alone is the creator, maintainer, and dissolver of all worlds. Knowing this, wise devotees continuously worship and remember Him with unalloyed love.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya states: Out of grace towards devotees who worship Him with love, the Lord Himself bestows upon them that Buddhi-yoga which dispels all doubts and absorbs them into Himself.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati states: To those who selflessly and lovingly worship Me at all times, I manifest in their intellect that matured Buddhi-yoga (intuitive illumination) by which they attain My manifest and unmanifest Absolute Being.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami states: To those who are ever devoted and worship Me with love, I grant that Buddhi-yoga (discreative wisdom) by which they reach Me.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanapati states: To devotees who worship with loving devotion, the Lord Himself grants that selfless right knowledge (Buddhi-yoga) which destroys ignorance and brings them to the supreme state of Godhead.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha states: Pleased by the loving devotion of ever-steadfast worshippers, the Lord bestows upon them that matured state of Bhakti (Buddhi-yoga) which leads directly to divine realization and union.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states: To those who worship Me with love, I grant that Buddhi-yoga (illumination of knowledge) by which they easily enter into My supreme abode.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelakantha states: To those who worship Him with constant devotion, the Lord bestows Buddhi-yoga (the intuitive light of discrimination), destroying ignorance and uniting the soul with God.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me.