Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
nimittāni ca paśyāmi viparītāni keśava .
na ca śreyo.anupaśyāmi hatvā svajanamāhave

Word Meanings:
निमित्तानि - omens
च - and
पश्यामि - I see
विपरीतानि - adverse
केशव - O Keshava
न - not
च - and
श्रेयः - good
अनुपश्यामि - do I see
हत्वा - by killing
स्वजनम् - own kinsmen
आहवे - in battle

Life Application:
Distinguish between genuine ethical warnings and rationalizations born of fear when facing tough choices.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Keshava! I see only adverse omens, and I do not see any good coming from killing my own kinsmen in battle.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
And I see adverse omens, O Kesava. I do not see any good
in killing my kinsmen in battle.

निमित्तानि omens? च and? पश्यामि I see? विपरीतानि adverse? केशव O Kesava? न not? च and? श्रेयः good? अनुपश्यामि (I) see? हत्वा killing? स्वजनम् our peope? आहवे in battle.Commentary Kesava means he who has fine or luxuriant hair.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The omens are adverse; what good can come from the slaughter of my people on this battlefield?

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
No commentary.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O Govinda!  Of  what use in the kingdom to us?  Of  what use are the pleasures [thereof]  and the life even?

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
I see, Krsna, inauspicious omens. I foresee no good in killing my kinsmen in the fight.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Besides, I do not see any good (to be derived) from killing my own people in battle. O Krsna, I do not hanker after victory, nor even a kingdom nor pleasures.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Moreover, he says that even from the destruction of his own kinsmen in battle, no benefit is perceived, and hence a desire to withdraw arises, in 'Na cha...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Keshava! I see even the omens as adverse, and I do not see any benefit in killing my kinsmen in battle.

Explanation: 'Nimittani cha pashyami viparitani keshava' -- O Keshava! I see even the omens as adverse. The point is: the more enthusiasm (joy) there is in the mind at the start of any undertaking, the more that enthusiasm ensures its success. But if enthusiasm breaks down right at the outset, and the mind's resolves and doubts are not settled, the outcome of that undertaking is not good. With this in mind, Arjuna is saying: the symptoms now appearing in my body -- limbs giving way, trembling, mouth drying -- these personal omens too are not favorable. Besides this, earlier omens such as meteors falling from the sky, an untimely eclipse, earthquakes, animals and birds crying terrifyingly, the moon's dark mark seeming to fade, and blood raining from clouds, were also inauspicious. Thus, looking at both these present and earlier omens, both appear to me adverse -- that is, signs of coming misfortune.

'Na cha shreyo'nupashyami hatva svajanamahave' -- it is not the case that we shall gain any benefit from killing our kinsmen in battle. The outcome of this war does not appear beneficial for us, either in this world or the next. For one who destroys his own lineage is exceedingly sinful. Hence, destroying the lineage will bring us only sin, which leads to hell.

In this verse, through the two statements 'nimittani pashyami' and 'shreyah anupashyami,' Arjuna wishes to say: whether I look at the omens or reflect for myself, in either way the beginning of this war and its outcome appear beneficial neither for us nor for the world at large.

Transition: in the next verse Arjuna expresses his unwillingness to attain such a calamitous victory, in which neither auspicious omens nor any real benefit is to be seen.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Arjuna said -- Sanjaya said: The high-souled Partha, supremely compassionate, seeing there, stationed in both armies, his fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, and friends -- his own kinsmen arrayed for battle -- was overcome, and spoke thus to Krishna.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
'Na cha shreyah' etc. up to 'mahikrite': those wrongly conceived as objects to be slain, with the individualizing notion 'these are my teachers and the rest,' would necessarily generate sin thereby. Likewise, the act of slaying, even of those who truly deserve to be slain in battle, if undertaken with the thought 'this battle is being waged for visible ends such as pleasure, happiness and the like' -- that too necessarily generates sin. This notion lies hidden within Arjuna's objection. It is for this very reason that the Lord's reply will be given: 'you must perform actions solely as your own duty, not with the individualizing notion [of who is being slain, or of what is to be gained].'

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
By the word 'Keshava,' Arjuna hints: since You, by slaying Keshi and other wicked demons, ever protect Your devotees, You will surely protect me too by dispelling my grief. Thus, having stated grief -- the obstacle to right knowledge that is the cause of correct conduct -- through these symptoms, he now shows the perverse understanding produced by that grief, which is itself the cause of his misguided resolve: I do not, upon much reflection, perceive any good, whether seen or unseen, even afterward; I do not see any good even in slaying non-kinsmen in battle. As it is said: 'There are two kinds of men in this world who reach the sun's realm -- the renunciant established in yoga, and one slain facing the enemy in battle' -- thus only for the slain is special merit spoken of, but for the slayer there is no merit whatsoever. Thus, since there is no good even in slaying non-kinsmen, all the more so is there none in slaying one's own kinsmen -- to convey this, the word 'svajanam' (one's own people) is used. And to forestall the objection that there is no good even outside of battle, the word 'ahave' (in battle) is used.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover, in 'Na cha...': I do not see any good, any benefit, in killing my kinsmen in battle.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
That delusion also arises from the perception of adverse omens -- he states this, in 'Nimittani...': I see adverse omens -- the twitching of the left eye and the like. Thus, the destruction of my own kinsmen will follow from these omens; not, as You once protected Your own people by slaying Keshi and other demons, do I see such protection here -- hinting at this, he addresses the Lord as 'O Keshava.' Being unaware of the true Self, and hence suffering, I experience the affliction born of grief -- whereas You, being ever of the nature of bliss, are untouched by grief -- this is conveyed by the word 'Krishna.' Hence, even though the sight of one's own kinsmen is the same for both, by this distinguishing mark, the sense is: may You render me too free from grief. The word 'Keshava' conveys the capacity to do so -- its etymology being 'he to whom even the creator Brahma and the destroyer Rudra go for mercy.' Or, the word 'Krishna' may convey His being drawn by the suffering of His devotee. By the word 'Keshava,' some say, it is hinted: since You, by slaying Keshi and other wicked ones, ever protect Your devotees, You will surely protect me too by dispelling my grief. Now, his mind overcome by grief and delusion, he proceeds to attribute unrighteousness and futility to his own duty, in 'Na cha...': having killed my own kinsmen, my own family, on the battlefield, I do not, afterward, see any good. Hence, the very sense is: it is fitting to withdraw from this fruitless violence toward kinsmen, which is itself the cause of unrighteousness.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Sri Venkatanatha did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He states this very point, in 'Na cha...': having slain my own kinsmen in battle, I do not, afterward, see any good. 'Good' here means devotion born of the Lord's own grace -- as the Lord Himself has said: 'Hence for one who is My devotee, a yogi absorbed in Me, neither knowledge nor renunciation is generally as beneficial as this' (Bhagavatam 11.20.31).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Nimittani' means the omens that portend the world's destruction, such as earthquakes and the like.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this battle, nor can I, my dear Kṛṣṇa, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom or happiness.

 Without knowing that one’s self-interest is in Viṣṇu (or Kṛṣṇa), conditioned souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to be happy in such situations. In such a blind conception of life, they forget even the causes of material happiness. Arjuna appears to have even forgotten the moral codes for a kṣatriya. It is said that two kinds of men, namely the kṣatriya who dies directly in front of the battlefield under Kṛṣṇa’s personal orders and the person in the renounced order of life who is absolutely devoted to spiritual culture, are eligible to enter into the sun globe, which is so powerful and dazzling. Arjuna is reluctant even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He thinks that by killing his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life, and therefore he is not willing to fight, just as a person who does not feel hunger is not inclined to cook. He has now decided to go into the forest and live a secluded life in frustration. But as a kṣatriya, he requires a kingdom for his subsistence, because the kṣatriyas cannot engage themselves in any other occupation. But Arjuna has no kingdom. Arjuna’s sole opportunity for gaining a kingdom lies in fighting with his cousins and brothers and reclaiming the kingdom inherited from his father, which he does not like to do. Therefore he considers himself fit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.