Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
athaitadapyaśakto.asi kartuṃ madyogamāśritaḥ .
sarvakarmaphalatyāgaṃ tataḥ kuru yatātmavān

Word Meanings:
अथ - if
एतत् - this
अपि - also
अशक्तः - unable
असि - art
कर्तुम् - to do
मद्योगम् - My Yoga
आश्रितः - resorting to
सर्वकर्मफलत्यागम् - renunciation of fruits of all actions
ततः - then
कुरु - do
यतात्मवान् - selfcontrolled.

Life Application:
If even divine service feels difficult, take refuge in devotion and surrender the fruits of all your actions with self-control.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
And if you are unable to do even this, then, taking refuge in My Yoga, renounce the fruits of all actions, being self-controlled.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
If thou art unable to do even this, then, resorting to union with Me, renounce the fruits of all actions with the self controlled.

अथ if? एतत् this? अपि also? अशक्तः unable? असि (thou) art? कर्तुम् to do? मद्योगम् My Yoga? आश्रितः resorting to? सर्वकर्मफलत्यागम् the renunciation of the fruits of all actions? ततः then? कुरु do? यतात्मवान् selfcontrolled.Commentary This is the easiest path. If thou art unable to perform actions for My sake? if thou canst not even be intent on My service? if thou art unable to practise the Bhagavata Dharmas? if thous wishest to do actions impelled by personal desires? then do thou perform them (for your sake from a sense of duty) renouncing them all in Me and also abandon the fruits of all actions? at the same time practising selfcontrol.In verse 8 the Yoga of meditation is prescribed for advanced students in verse 9 the Yoga of constant practice if one finds that? too? to be difficult? the performance of actions for the sake of the Lord alone has been taught in verse 10 and those who cannot do even this are asked to abandon the fruits of all actions.Madyogam My Yoga. Surrendering all actions and their fruits to Me is My Yoga.Yatatmavan The man of discrimination who has controlled all the senses? who has withdrawn the senses from sound? touch? form? taste and smell.Now the Lord eulogises the renunciation of the fruits of all actions in order to encourage the aspirants to practise the Yoga of renunciation of the fruits of actions.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
And if thou art too weak even for this, then seek refuge in union with Me, and with perfect self-control renounce the fruit of thy action.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In the previous verse, we were advised to perform actions in the world by completely renouncing the ego. This task is not so simple for an extremely egoistic and proud person. Such a person remains highly agitated due to Rajoguna, and his personality is poisoned due to the lower tendencies of Tamoguna. The Gita suggests a path of practice even for such a low-level individual. Often such a person becomes a subject of despair for all religions. But, in the Gita, a thoughtful treatment has been prescribed even for patients suffering from such chronic diseases. That treatment is simple yet so effective that by it, the patient can be completely freed from the disease and blessed with the glow of the highest personality and efficiency.

If it is impossible to perform all actions with the attitude of offering them to God, then another equally effective remedy is stated here for that seeker: that, being endowed with self-control, taking refuge in the Yoga of achieving Me, you renounce the fruits of all actions.

It appears that Lord Sri Krishna dislikes those who are mere wage-earners. But His dislike should not be understood as contempt felt by middle-class or upper-class people towards laborers who sweat. In a nation with a socialist system, this impatience of Sri Krishna arises in the mind of every educated person. They cannot tolerate such people in their nation who perform actions only for wages or personal gain. In such a socialist nation, every employee who demands the highest salary for the minimum time of work performed with maximum inefficiency would be considered a punishable criminal. Lord Sri Krishna's dislike for such wage-earners is clearly visible in His teachings.

Action performed in the present moment matures and manifests as fruit in a future moment. Today, if a farmer plows the land and sows seeds, he will get that crop only after two or three months. And if that farmer, abandoning the work to be done in the present, wastes time worrying only about the fruit to come in the future, then surely he can never get any profit. Although this is a well-known fact, the vast majority of people lose present opportunities merely in worrying about the future. Because of worry and fear of the future, all our capacities are destroyed, and that imaginary dark future has not yet arrived, and perhaps may never come. Here Lord Sri Krishna only inspires us to abandon these useless imaginations about the future and live a vigilant, complete, and effective life in the present. By living this kind of life also, our personality can become well-integrated and the mind focused and capable.

In the above three verses, three different practices have been described for three types of seekers. All human beings are extrovert to some extent. The difference between two men is due to the thickness of the layers of Vasanas (desires/impressions) present in their minds. If a brass vessel is slightly dirty, it is sufficient to scrub it with ash only to make it shine; if that dirt is thicker, some acid is needed for its cleanliness. Similarly, if there is only a thin layer of Vasanas in the mind, then the distractions arising from it can be controlled through Abhyasayoga (Yoga of practice). But if there is an excess of Vasanas, Karmayoga will be required, in which the seeker is advised to offer all actions to God. If the layers of Vasanas in a person's heart are even thicker, he is asked to renounce the fruits of actions. Here, renouncing the fruits of actions means completely abandoning the useless worries and imaginations of future fruits and continuing to perform actions in the present. As I have said before, in no other spiritual text in the world have such diverse and detailed paths for self-development been discussed as in the Bhagavad Gita.

The above three practices cannot be practiced together. They are to be done sequentially. Showing this, in the next verse, the Lord praises the renunciation of all fruits of actions.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Now, if you are not capable of doing this too, then taking resort to My Yoga renounce the fruit of all action, with your self (mind) subdued.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
If you are unable to do even this, i.e., taking refuge in My Yoga, then, with your self controlled, renounce the fruits of every action.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
If you are unable to do even this, in that case, having resorted to the Yoga for Me, thereafter renounce the results of all works by becoming controlled in mind.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
'Atha' (now) etc. doubts that being intent on actions for the Lord is also impossible. The meaning is, because the mind is attracted to external objects. In that case, become one with a controlled mind as a means to attain the Lord, and perform the renunciation of the fruits of actions, thus he says, 'Madyogam' (My Yoga) etc.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
If, taking refuge in My Yoga (equanimity), you are unable to do even this (the means mentioned in the previous verse), then, subduing the mind and senses, renounce the fruit of all actions.

Commentary—'Athaitadapyaśakto.asi kartuṃ madyogamāśritaḥ'—In the previous verse, the Lord declared attainment of Him by performing all actions for Him alone, and now in this verse He is explaining the means in the form of the renunciation of the fruits of all actions. Since devotion is predominant in performing all actions for the Lord, it is called 'Bhakti Yoga', and here since only the renunciation of the fruit is prominent in the renunciation of all fruits of actions, it is called 'Karma Yoga'. In this way, both of these are independent (separate) means of attaining God. In this verse, the relation of the word 'madyogamāśritaḥ' is appropriate to be taken with 'athaitadapyaśakto.asi'; because if its relation is taken with 'sarvakarmaphalatyāgaṃ kuru', then due to the prominence of refuge in God, it would become 'Bhakti Yoga' itself. In such a situation, it would not differ from the means of Bhakti Yoga mentioned in the tenth verse, whereas the Lord wants to state two different means in the tenth and eleventh verses respectively—'Bhakti Yoga' and 'Karma Yoga'. Secondly, the Lord has also used the word 'yatātmavān' (one who has conquered the body along with the mind, intellect, and senses) in this verse. The special necessity of self-control is in Karma Yoga itself; because without self-control, the renunciation of the fruit of all actions is impossible. For this reason also, the relation of the word 'madyogamāśritaḥ' should be taken with 'athaitadapyaśakto.asi', and not with the command to renounce all fruits of actions.

He who does not have so much faith in God, but has more faith in God's order, i.e., in serving the country/society, etc., for him the Lord describes the means of renunciation of the fruit of all actions in this verse. The meaning is that if he cannot surrender all actions to Me, then he should renounce the desire for the fruit which is not in his hands—'karmaṇyevādhikāraste mā phaleṣu kadācana' (Gita 2.47). By performing duty-bound actions while renouncing the desire for the fruit, his connection with the world will be severed.

'Sarvakarmaphalatyāgaṃ tataḥ kuru yatātmavān'—In the practice of Karma Yoga, there is naturally an expansion of actions; because performing actions with a detached attitude is said to be the cause in attaining Yoga (Gita 6.3). Due to this, there remains a fear of bondage because of attachment to fruits in actions. Therefore, by the word 'yatātmavān', the Lord indicates the necessity of control over the mind, senses, etc., in the means of renouncing the fruits of actions. It is to be noted that when the mind and senses are controlled, the renunciation of the fruits of actions also becomes easy. If the seeker does not control the mind, intellect, senses, etc., then naturally his mind will contemplate on sense objects and he will develop attachment to those objects. Due to this, there will be a high probability of his downfall (Gita 2.62-63). Since renunciation is the goal, the seeker can easily control the mind and senses.

Here the word 'sarvakarma' (all actions) refers to sacrifices, charity, penance, service, and all actions prescribed by the scriptures for livelihood and bodily maintenance according to one's Varna and Ashrama. The meaning of renouncing the fruits of all actions is not the physical abandonment of the fruit of action, but the abandonment of possessiveness (mamata), attachment (asakti), desire (kamana), cravings (vasana), etc., in the fruit of action.

In the means of Karma Yoga, the physical abandonment of actions is not spoken of; because doing action is necessary (Gita 6.3). As said before, the need is only to renounce possessiveness, attachment, desire, etc., in actions and their fruits. The practitioner of Karma Yoga should not become inactive (lazy); because hearing about the renunciation of the fruit of action, a seeker often thinks that when nothing is to be gained, then what is the need to perform actions! Therefore, the Lord, while speaking of Karma Yoga in the forty-seventh verse of the second chapter, prohibited inactivity (abandonment of action) for the seeker by saying 'mā te saṅgo.astvakarmaṇi' ('let not thy attachment be to inaction').

In the ninth verse of the eighteenth chapter, the Lord, while stating the characteristics of Sattvika renunciation, called the abandonment of attachment to fruits alone as 'Sattvika' renunciation, and not the physical abandonment of actions. By performing actions while abandoning the attachment to fruits, the momentum of performing actions subsides and old attachments are wiped out. Due to the absence of desire for the fruit, the connection with actions is completely severed and new attachments are not created. Then the seeker becomes fulfilled. It is attachment, craving, desire, possessiveness, expectation of fruit, etc., in objects that create the momentum of activities. In their presence, even if one forcibly abandons activities, the momentum of activities does not subside. Due to the presence of like and dislike (raga-dvesha), the seeker's nature again drives him to perform actions. Therefore, only by performing duty-bound actions with a desireless attitude after abandoning likes and dislikes, the momentum of activities is pacified.

For those seekers who do not have natural faith and devotion in the personal God (Saguna-Sakara), but instead have more faith and interest in performing practical and welfare activities for the society, this means (renunciation of the fruits of all actions) is very useful.

Wherever the Lord has spoken of the renunciation of the fruits of actions, the abandonment of attachment and desire for fruits should be understood; because in the Lord's view, the connection with actions is completely severed only by the complete abandonment of attachment and desire for fruits (Gita 18.6). The renunciation of the fruits of all actions (desire for fruits) is an independent means of attaining God. By the renunciation of the fruits of actions, attachment to sense objects is destroyed and peace (Sattvika happiness) is attained. By not consuming that peace (i.e. by not getting stuck in it by making it a source of pleasure), that peace brings about the realization of the Supreme Truth and makes one identical with It. In the fifty-fifth verse of the eleventh chapter, the Lord stated 'saṅgavarijitaḥ' (free from attachment) as one of the five characteristics of a devotee seeker. In this verse, the Lord speaks of the renunciation of the fruits of all actions, which is possible only by the complete abandonment of attachment to the world. The fruit of this (renunciation of all fruits of actions) is stated by the Lord in the twelfth verse of this very chapter to be the immediate attainment of supreme peace. Therefore, it should be understood that even by the complete abandonment of attachment alone, supreme peace or attainment of God is achieved.

Connection—From the eighth to the eleventh verse, the Lord stated one means after another, and if one is unable, then a third, and if unable, then a fourth means. This may raise a doubt whether the 'renunciation of the fruits of all actions' mentioned at the end is of the lowest category because it is stated at the very end and the Lord has not mentioned any fruit of it. Dispelling this doubt, the Lord states the greatness and fruit of the means of the renunciation of the fruits of all actions.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
If you are unable to do even this 'taking refuge in My Yoga,' i.e., if you are unable even to do actions for My sake, which forms the sprout of Bhakti Yoga, wherein through meditation I am made the exclusive and sole object of love - then you should resort to Aksara Yoga described in the first six chapters. It consists in contemplation on the nature of the individual self. This engenders devotion to the Lord. As a means for practice of this (Aksara Yoga), renounce the fruit of every action.

The state of mind that holds Me as the only worthy object of attainment and love arises only when all the sins of an aspirant are destroyed without exception. 'One with a controlled mind' means one with the mind subdued. When the individual self is visualised to be of the nature of a Sesa (subsidiary) to the Lord, and when the veil of nescience consisting in identifying the self with the body is removed by contemplation on the self generated through the performance of works without attachment to the fruits and with My propitiation as the sole objective - then supreme Bhakti to Me will originate by itself. [The point driven home is this:  It is nescience that stands between the Jiva and the Lord. This nescience consists in identification of the self with the body. It is through works done without an eye on their fruits but exclusively as an offering to the Lord, that this nescience is removed. Thus Karma Yoga is the sprout of self-realisation, and of Bhakti. On the nescience being removed, the knowledge that one (i.e., the Jiva) is a Sesa (an absolutely dependent liege) of the Lord, dawns on the Jiva. Such knowledge generates exclusive devotion or Bhakti accompanied by Prapatti. Or if the Jiva gets immersed in Its own bliss, It will attain Kaivalya.]

In the same manner, Sri Krsna will further show in the text beginning with 'By worshipping Him with his work will a man reach perfection' (18.46) and ending with 'Forsaking the feeling of "I" and with no feeling of "mine" and tranil, one becomes worthy of the state of Brahman. Having realised the state of Brahman, tranil, he neither grieves nor craves. Regarding all beings alike, he attains supreme devotion to Me' (18.53-54).

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Atha etc.  In case due to ignorance, you do not know the method, enjoined in the scriptures and hence you are not able to perform actions for the Lord, then renounce  (dedicate) all that to Me, through offering your own self  [to Me].  This is the intention  [here].  Holding the same intention, I have myself declared in the Laghuprakriya as :
 
'Whatever action I have done, whether it is incomplete or superfluous,  not properly understood, bereft of a  proper order of precedence, devoid of  [good] care, and full of slip of intellect;
 
O Lord of All !  Please, with mercy forgive all these of me, the afflicted and foolish devotee of Yours; for you are compassionate;
 
With this prayer-Yoga,  I offer myself to You  [so that]  I do not become a receptacle of miseries again unnecessarily.'
 
the same idea may be observed in the scriptural texts of  the  Siddhanta  [system] - that have the Supreme Lord as their subject matter - while they  speak of offering oneself  [to the Lord].								
 The same purport is summed up -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Atha, if, again; asaktah asi, you are unable; kartum, to do; etat api, even this-what was stated as being 'intent on doing works for Me'; in that case, mad-yogam-asritah, having resorted to the Yoga for Me-the performance of those works that are being done by dedicating them to Me is madyogah; by resorting to that Yoga for Me; tatah, thereafter; sarva-karma-phala-tyagam kuru, renounce, give up, the results of all works; by becoming yata-atmavan, controlled in mind. [In the earlier verse it was enjoined that all works, be they Vedic or secular, are to be considered as belonging to God and should be done for Him-not for oneself-, as a soldier would do for his king. In the present verse it is stated that the attitude should be, 'May this work of mine please God.' This very attitude involves dedicating of results to God. See S.
According to M.S., mat-karma in the earlier verse means bhagavata-dharma, i.e. hearing, singing, etc. about God. In the present verse, sarva-karma means all works in general.-Tr.]
Now the Lord praises the renunciation of the results of all works:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
If you are unable to perform even this, then, taking refuge in My Yoga, which consists in the relationship of served and servant with Me, renounce the fruits of all actions. This is what is said: by performing one's own duty to the best of one's ability according to the path of surrender instructed by the Supreme Teacher (Guru) under God's command, which is pleasant when accompanied by the renunciation of fruits, etc., and placing the burden on Me, one attains fulfillment in My refuge by abandoning other paths of knowledge, yoga, and dharma. The details will be clarified further ahead.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Atha' (now) etc. If, because your mind is attracted to external objects, you are unable to perform even this being intent on actions for Me, then, having resorted to My Yoga which is taking exclusive refuge in Me—My Yoga is the surrender of all actions to Me—and having resorted to that, being one with controlled self (controlled senses) and discrimination (yatatmavan), renounce the fruits of all actions; the meaning is, give up the desire for the fruits of actions.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
For one who is extremely incapable of being established in Bhagavata Dharma (the duty to God), another alternative is stated—'Athaitadapi' etc. If you are unable to do even this, then, resorting to My Yoga which is taking exclusive refuge in Me, and having a controlled mind, renounce the fruits of all actions, whether they are for seen (earthly) or unseen (heavenly) purposes, including obligatory actions like Agnihotra. This is what is said: 'By me, according to my ability, actions must be performed under God's command; but the fruit, whether seen or unseen, is under the control of the Supreme Lord.' Thus, by placing the burden on Me and living by renouncing attachment to fruits, you will achieve fulfillment by My grace—this is the purport.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Then, for one who is incapable of being intent on actions for the Lord due to the mind being attracted to objects, another means is stated—'Athaitadapi' etc. If you are unable to do even this, then, resorting to My Yoga—performing all actions by dedicating them to Me is My Yoga—resorting to that and taking exclusive refuge in Me, thereafter renounce the fruits of all actions, meaning being endowed with a controlled mind of discrimination.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
For one whose mind is bound only to actions for one's own sake, how can there be involvement with great love in actions for Your sake? To answer this, he reminds us of Karma Yoga, which is the ultimate limit of the series of means, saying 'Athaitad...' (If you are unable to do even this...).
To prevent connecting the phrase 'resorting to My Yoga (madyogamāśritaḥ)' with the latter half of the verse concerning Aksara Yoga, he shows its connection with the first half, saying 'Atha madyogam...' (Atha, if My Yoga...). To indicate the impossibility of that for him, he says 'mad-guṇa...' (meditation on My qualities).
To show that among the different stages of Bhakti Yoga, there is no stage prior to this, he calls it 'bhakti-yogāṅkura-rūpam' (the sprout of Bhakti Yoga).
By the word 'madyogam' (My Yoga), the Yoga of the individual self (jīvātmā-yoga) is excluded. Therefore, the meaning of the sentence is: 'If you are unable to perform actions in that sprout (madyoga) by resorting to My Yoga, then, resorting to the Yoga of the individual self, engage in Karma Yoga, which is its sprout.' Keeping this in mind, he says 'tato'kṣara...' (then Aksara Yoga).
To exclude Aksara Yoga's being an immediate means to liberation, he says 'parabhaktijananam' (generating supreme devotion).
To recognize Aksara Yoga along with its methods, and to exclude the Aksara Yoga described in the middle six chapters, he says 'pūrva-ṣaṭkodi-tam' (described in the first six chapters).
To exclude the immediate generation of Bhakti Yoga by the renunciation of the fruits of all actions, he says 'tadupāyatayā' (as a means to that).
He shows how self-realization preceded by Karma Yoga is useful in generating devotion, which is stated in another context: 'mat-priyatvena...' (by being dear to Me...).
In 'mayyeva mana ādhatsva' (12.8), the concentration of the mind on the Supreme Self was previously enjoined. For one who is incapable of that, who is engaged in actions that are of the nature of the sprout of Aksara Yoga, the possibility of controlling the mind by the reasons explained in the first six chapters is indicated by the word 'yatātmavān' (controlled in self); keeping this in mind, he says 'yatamanaska' (with subdued mind).
He explains the way of generating Bhakti Yoga sequentially, as will be described in the subsequent verse of Karma Yoga, saying 'tato'nabhisaṃhite' (thereafter by unmotivated...).
By saying 'renounce the fruit' (phala-tyāgaṃ kuru), which is a statement of abandoning the result, the performance of the means preceding it is implied; to show this, he says 'anabhisaṃhita-phalena...' (by action done without attachment to fruits...).
The achievement of self-contemplation is through the peace of mind to be described subsequently. 
Action is the cause of samsara, called Avidya, as stated in Vishnu Purana: 'The power of the Knower of the Field is enveloped by Avidya, which is called action' (VP 6.7.61). By the word 'adi' (etc.), it refers to the collection of statements like: 'The belief that the self is the non-self, and that which is not one's own is one's own—this is the twofold seed of the tree of Avidya' (VP 6.7.11). Or here, Avidya refers to the delusion of identifying the body with the self, and 'adi' refers to the impressions of action (karma-vasanas), etc.
To establish the generation of supreme devotion, it is said 'mac-cheṣataika-svarūpe' (in the individual self whose sole nature is being subservient to Me).
Just as in childhood, a prince who goes out of the royal palace in play, gets lost, is captured by hunters, and lives in a hunter's hamlet, upon receiving advice from a trustworthy person, thinks of his own nature, sees his likeness to the king in his limbs, etc., and develops boundless love towards the king as his father; similarly, for this Jiva also, when the individual self, whose nature is subservient to God, is realized in its true nature as similar to Him according to the instruction, nothing remains to be done for the attainment of devotion; with this intention, he says 'supreme devotion to Me arises by itself' (mayi parā bhaktiḥ svayamevotpadyata).
By this it is established that the Aksara Yoga mentioned at the beginning of the chapter in 'ye cāpyakṣaramavyaktam' (12.1), also, through the realization of the Aksara (individual self), generates supreme devotion and terminates in the attainment of the Supreme Self. That very Aksara Yoga, which was taught in the first six chapters, is clearly spoken of here.
One might ask: is it not seen that what is instructed to an incapable person is another means having an equal result, intended for the unqualified person? Like other baths for one incapable of immersing in water. And it is said elsewhere that Kriya Yoga is a direct means to liberation: 'Worshipping the Lord of the universe through Kriya Yoga, one is liberated from the unmanifest, unthinkable, ungrasped cause of liberation.' Why should it not be the same here? Dispelling this doubt, he shows the character of Karma Yoga as a means to Bhakti Yoga, which will be described in the eighteenth chapter, saying 'tathāce-ti' (and so...).
And elsewhere also, this order is clear: 'If you cannot concentrate your mind there, then be intent on its practice, do Yoga day and night. For the great-souled one who is incapable even in that, Kriya Yoga, which was declared by Brahma, be constantly intent on that. Whatever actions you do, offer them to the God of gods, the Lord of the world; welfare to you, you will be freed from action. Yoga is the main cause of liberation, O Lord of the Daityas, and Kriya Yoga is the supreme means to that Yoga.'
To show that the result to be mentioned in 'he attains supreme devotion to Me' (18.54) has Karma Yoga as its cause, which is established in the context, he says 'beginning with: By worshipping Him with his work will a man reach perfection (18.46) etc.'

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He states a very easy means to achieve this—'Athaitad' etc. If you are unable or not capable of performing even this for My sake due to ignorance of the true nature, then, taking refuge in My Yoga—My Yoga means connection with Me or a devotee who has such connection—and being self-controlled, focusing your mind solely on that, perform the renunciation of the fruits of all actions like Sandhyavandana, Agnihotra, etc., which lead to fruits like heaven; the meaning is, abandon the thinking of their fruits. When there is no desire for their fruits, and actions are performed under My command, the mind is purified through actions, and the knowledge instructed by My devotee will become stable; through that, the realization of actions for Me will be achieved—this is the idea.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Madyoga' means steadfastness in hearing, chanting, etc. In that case, perform the renunciation of the fruits of all Vedic and Smriti actions mentioned earlier. 'Yatatmavan' means one who has self-restraint (rules of conduct) and who is controlled in mind (conquered mind).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness of Me, then try to act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.

 It may be that one is unable even to sympathize with the activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness because of social, familial or religious considerations or because of some other impediments. If one attaches himself directly to the activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there may be objections from family members, or so many other difficulties. For one who has such a problem, it is advised that he sacrifice the accumulated result of his activities to some good cause. Such procedures are described in the Vedic rules. There are many descriptions of sacrifices and special functions for the full-moon day, and there is special work in which the result of one’s previous action may be applied. Thus one may gradually become elevated to the state of knowledge. It is also found that when one who is not even interested in the activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness gives charity to some hospital or some other social institution, he gives up the hard-earned results of his activities. That is also recommended here because by the practice of giving up the fruits of one’s activities one is sure to purify his mind gradually, and in that purified stage of mind one becomes able to understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Of course, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not dependent on any other experience, because Kṛṣṇa consciousness itself can purify one’s mind, but if there are impediments to accepting Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one may try to give up the results of his actions. In that respect, social service, community service, national service, sacrifice for one’s country, etc., may be accepted so that some day one may come to the stage of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gītā (18.46) we find it is stated, yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānām: if one decides to sacrifice for the supreme cause, even if he does not know that the supreme cause is Kṛṣṇa, he will come gradually to understand that Kṛṣṇa is the supreme cause by the sacrificial method.