Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
na tadasti pṛthivyāṃ vā divi deveṣu vā punaḥ .
sattvaṃ prakṛtijairmuktaṃ yadebhiḥ syāttribhirguṇaiḥ

Word Meanings:
न - not
तत् - that
अस्ति - is
पृथिव्याम् - on the earth
वा - or
दिवि - in heaven
देवेषु - among the gods
वा - or
पुनः - again
सत्त्वम् - being
प्रकृतिजैः - born of Prakriti
मुक्तम् - freed
यत् - which
एभिः - from these
स्यात् - may be
त्रिभिः - from three
गुणैः - by qualities

Life Application:
No entity on earth or in heaven among gods is free from these three modes born of nature.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
There is no being on earth, or again in heaven among the gods, that is free from these three qualities born of Nature.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
There is no being on earth or again in heaven among the gods, that is liberated from the three alities born of Nature.

न not? तत् that? अस्ति is? पृथिव्याम् on the earth? वा or? दिवि in heaven? देवेषु among the gods? वा or? पुनः again? सत्त्वम् being? प्रकृतिजैः born of Prakriti (matter)? मुक्तम् freed? यत् which? एभिः from these? स्यात् may be? त्रिभिः from three? गुणैः by alities.Commentary The Gunas form the warp and woof of everything as threads do in the case of cloth.Here in the world of mortals or there in the heavenworld? there is no creature that is not bound by the three alities of Nature. Can there be a cloth without threads Can there be a man without blood and bones Can there be a mountain without stones Even so there is not a single creature in the whole universe into whose composition the three alities of matter do not enter. The whole of creation is wrought of these three alities. They have given rise to the Trinity (Brahma? Vishnu and Siva). In the world of mortals the triplicity of agent? action and fruit owe their origin to them. They are the cause of the different functions of the four castes. This Samsara has been compared to the peepul tree in chapter XV.1. This Samsara is made up of the three alities and is kept up by the force of ignorance.Action? instruments of action and fruits have set the wheel of Samsara in motion and this wheel is revolving from beginningless time. It is only a liberated sage who has attained knowledge of the Self who puts a check to this wheel? goes beyond the cause and the effect? and breaks the bonds of Karma.Cut this mysterious tree of Samsara with the strong sword of nonattachment? transcend the three Gunas and rest in your own essential divine nature as ExistenceKnowledgeBliss Absolute.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
There is nothing anywhere on earth or in the higher worlds which is free from the three Qualities - for they are born of Nature.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
With this verse, the detailed analysis of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas) and their psychological impact on human personality concludes. Nature (Prakriti) itself is made of these three Gunas; hence, everything in creation (on earth and in heaven) is bound by them. No two individuals behave identically because of the difference in the proportion of these Gunas. To transcend them, one must realize the supreme Self, which is beyond the Gunas. This leads to the division of duties (varna) based on one's inherent Gunas, which is detailed in the next verses.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Whether on the earth, or again among the gods in the heaven, there exists not a single being, which is free from these three Strands, born of the Material-Nature.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
There is no creature, either on earth or again among the gods in heaven, that is free from these three Gunas born of Prakrti.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
There is no such entity in the world or, again, among the gods in heaven, which can be free from these three gunas born of Nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
After describing the threefold divisions of knowledge, actions, instruments, and results, the Lord states that no being in the entire transmigratory existence (samsara), from the highest gods to lower beings, is free from these three Gunas.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
There is no being on earth or again in heaven among the gods, or anywhere else, that is free from these three Gunas born of Prakriti.

Commentary: The entire universe, all planes of existence (earthly and heavenly), and all classes of beings (humans, gods, demons, animals, plants) are composed of Gunas. Prakriti (Nature) and its qualities are binding when one identifies with them. Although Sattva-guna is helpful for spiritual progress because it brings clarity and wisdom, one must eventually rise even above Sattva-guna to realize the eternal, unconditioned Self. The next section details how these Gunas differentiate the natural duties of the four castes.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
There is no Sattva or creature born either among men etc., on the earth or among the gods in heaven, from Brahma down to immobile things, and having their basis in Prakrti, that is free from the dominance of the three Gunas of Prakrti.

'Tyaga', which has been determined as forming the means for release in the Sruti texts like 'By Tyaga alone do they attain immortality' (Ma. Na., 8.14), is of the same meaning as of the word 'Sannyasa'. It is rooted in the relinishment of the sense of agency in actions that are being performed.

The relinishment of the results and of possessiveness in actions, and the relinguishing of agency are to be gained by ascribing the agency to the Supreme Person. As all these are the effects of the increase of Sattva-guna, the differences of the effects of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas have been described at length with a view to instruct that Sattva is to be cultivated.

Now Sri Krsna, with a view to inculcate that actions done including their fruits, as a means to release and attainment of Him, must be of the nature of the worship of the Supreme Person, and that the fruit thereof is the attainment of Him - describes the actions obligatory for the alified classes of the people such as Brahmanas, differentiated by virtue of the natural alities arising from the Gunas such as Sattva, as also the occupations prescribed for those classes.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Na tad asti etc. In this manner, the agent, the object and the instrument, the intellect and content, and happiness are classified under different heads of the Sattva etc. All these beings, starting from the gods down to the immovables, do not transcend the relation with the triad of the Strands. Indeed the real happiness is [only] to him whose mind has gone beyond the Strands and not to anyone else. If you engage yourself in the action with this resolve for correct knowledge, then because of your undertaking of your own righteous action and because of your sanctity through wisdom, there is no bondage of action for you.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Na asti, there is no; tat, such; sattvam, entity, living creatures like men and others, or non-living things; prthivyam, in the world; va punah, or, again; an entity devesu, among the gods; divi, in heaven; yat, which; syat, can be [-this is connected with the preceding portion 'na tat, there is no such (entity)'-]; muktam, free; hih, from these; trubhih, three; gunaih, gunas, sattva etc.; prakrti-jaih, born of Nature.
It has been said that the entire transmigratory state together with its roots, characterized by action, agent and resuls-consisting of the gunas, sattva, rajas and tamas-, and projected by ignorance, is an evil. And this also has been said through the imagery of the Tree in the verse, '৷৷.which has its roots upward' etc. (15.1). It has been further said that, 'after felling that (Tree), with the strong sword of detachment, thereafter, that State has to be sought for' (15.3-4). And, as to that, since all things consist of the three gunas, there arises the impossibility of the eradication of the cause of worldly existence. Hence, it has to be shown how it can be eradicated. Besides, the purport of the scripture Gita has to be summed up, and it has also to be shown that the import of all the Vedas and the Smrtis, which must be put into practice by those who long for the Goal of human life, is verily this much. Hence begin the verses, 'The duties of the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas৷৷.', etc.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Everything in the creation up to the plane of Brahma (the Creator) is composed of the three Gunas of Prakriti. There is nothing free from them, except that which is transcendental (belonging to the Lord's divine pastimes).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Prakriti is the equilibrium of Gunas. Free from Gunas means free from the binding qualities born of Prakriti (or Maya). There is no object or being on earth or in heaven that is free from these three Gunas.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The Lord summarizes the section by stating that there is no creature or object in the entire world or heaven that is free from these three Gunas born of Prakriti.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Summarizing the sections on knowledge, action, agent, etc., the Lord says that the entire transmigratory existence (samsara), consisting of action, agent, and result, is projected by ignorance and composed of Gunas. Nothing on earth or in heaven is free from them.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Before attaining liberation (moksha), all bound souls (from Brahma down to immobile objects) are subject to the three Gunas. To show that only by subduing Rajas and Tamas can one rise, the Lord concludes this section.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
There is no being on earth or in heaven, from Brahma down to immobile things, that is free from the three Gunas. Prakriti and its Gunas bind the soul and keep it away from Me.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
No creature or object on earth or among the gods in heaven is free from these three Gunas born of Prakriti.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher planetary systems, which is freed from these three modes born of material nature.

 The Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of material nature all over the universe.