Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
adhaścordhvaṃ prasṛtāstasya śākhā guṇapravṛddhā viṣayapravālāḥ .
adhaśca mūlānyanusantatāni karmānubandhīni manuṣyaloke

Word Meanings:
अधः - below
च - and
ऊर्ध्वम् - above
प्रसृताः - spread
तस्य - its
शाखाः - branches
गुणप्रवृद्धाः - nourished by the Gunas
विषयप्रवालाः - senseobjects its buds
अधः - below
च - and
मूलानि - the roots
अनुसन्ततानि - are stretched forth
कर्मानुबन्धीनि - originating action
मनुष्यलोके - in the world of human beings

Life Application:
Its branches spread below and above, nourished by modes, sense objects as buds, roots binding to action in human world.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Its branches, nourished by the modes of Nature (Gunas), spread below and above, with the sense-objects as their buds; and its secondary roots stretch down in the world of men, binding them to actions.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Below and above spread its branches, nourished by the Gunas; sense-objects are its buds; and below, in the world of men, stretch forth the roots, originating action.

अधः below? च and? ऊर्ध्वम् above? प्रसृताः spread? तस्य its? शाखाः branches? गुणप्रवृद्धाः nourished by the Gunas? विषयप्रवालाः senseobjects (are) its buds? अधः below? च and? मूलानि the roots? अनुसन्ततानि are stretched forth? कर्मानुबन्धीनि originating action? मनुष्यलोके in the world of men.Commentary The countless objects? large and small? which life needs are all products of the five elements through the activity of the alities. This tree of Samsara is nourished by the three alities of Nature. The senseobjects are its buds and the roots which grow downwards are the bonds of Karma for those who lead a life of passion and attachment in this world? who are under the sway of likes and dislikes. The sprouts of this marvellous tree are the charming objects of the senses with their characteristics of sound? touch? colour? taste and smell. The roots? the Karmic tendencies from the past lives? grow downwards to generate the bonds of Karma in the world of men. These roots strengthen the bondage by further actions.The primal root is ignorance from which arises the eightfold Nature -- the five elements? mind? intellect and egoism. From the stem of the tree spring four branches called Svedaja? Andaja?,Jarayuja and Udbhijja. Eightyfour lakhs (eight million and four hundred thousand) of species came into being.One branch shoots straight upwards. This is the branch of Dharma which yields the fruit of enjoyment in heaven. Another branch is the branch of dispassion which yields the fruit of Selfrealisation. The sun? the planets? the manes and the sages have also come out of this wonderful tree. Above them are the branches of the worlds of Indra and the gods. Still higher are those of the sages and the men of austerities and penance. Still higher is the Satyaloka where Hiranyagarbha dwells.From man down to the immovable objects below and from him up to the realm of the Creator above? whatever regions are attained in accordance with the nature of knowledge or action? they are the ramifying branches of the tree of Samsara. They are nurtured and fattened by the three Gunas which form their material base.The senseobjects such as sound? touch? colour? taste and smell represent the buds that sprout from the branches of the physical bodies which are the products of actions.The highest root of this wondeful tree is Brahman. The secondary roots are the latent impressions (Samskaras) of likes and dislikes? which spread in this world of men and impel them to perform virtuus and vicious actions and bind them fast to actions.Now listen to the way by which this tree can be cut off. Only he who thus cuts his bondage to this tree of Samsara can be happy even in this world. He has the highest wisdom because he stands as a spectator of this tree and knows it as it is? without being tied to it.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Its branches shoot upwards and downwards, deriving their nourishment from the Qualities; its buds are the objects of sense; and its roots, which follow the Law causing man's regeneration and degeneration, pierce downwards into the soil.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Its branches spread below and above, nourished by the Gunas; sense-objects are its buds; and below, in the world of men, stretch forth the roots, originating action.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that the branches stretching above and below represent the various realms of existence (higher and lower species/realms) that Jivas enter based on the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas). The sense-objects are described as buds because they stimulate desires, leading to new actions and further branching. The secondary roots that stretch downwards into the world of men are the latent impressions (Vasanas) left by past actions. These Vasanas bind the individual to the cycle of ego-driven activities, keeping them anchored to the material world.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Of which (Tree) the branches, spreading downward and upward, well developed with Strands, have sense objects as sprouts; also below in the human world are Its roots, stretching successively, having actions for their sub-knots.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
(a) Its branches extend both above and below, nourished by the Gunas. Their shoots are sense objects ৷৷.

 (b) ৷৷. And their secondary roots extend downwards, resulting in acts which bind in the world of men.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The branches of that (Tree), extending down-wards and upwards, are strengthened by the alities and have sense-objects as their shoots. And the roots, which are followed by actions, spread down-wards in the human world [According to A.G. and M.S. manusya-loke means a body distinguished by Brahminhood etc.].

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that the elements exist in subtle forms, and hence the branches spread below and above. The objects of senses are called buds because they give momentary pleasure. The roots are the forms of the Lord who rewards beings according to their actions.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the branches spread from the human level down to the lowest immovables and up to Brahma's realm. The buds are the objects of senses which stimulate bodily actions. The secondary roots are the desires and mental impressions that bind humans to actions.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Its branches, nourished by the three Gunas, spread below, in the middle, and above, with the sense-objects as their buds. The secondary roots, which bind the soul to actions in the human world, also stretch below and above.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that the various species of life, from gods in the higher worlds (Urdhva) to animals and plants in the lower realms (Adhah), constitute the branches of this cosmic tree. These branches are nourished and developed by the association with the three modes of nature (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas). The twigs or buds represent the objects of the senses; thinking about these objects strengthens one's attachment. The secondary roots are the Jiva's egoism, sense of possession, and desires (Tadatma, Mamata, and Kamana). These roots spread in the human world and bind men to actions, causing them to revolve in the cycle of birth and death.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The 'secondary roots' of this tree having the main roots in the world of Brahman and its crest in men ramify below in the world of men. They bind them according to their Karma. The meaning is that the effects of acts causing bondag become roots in the world of men. For, the effect of actions done in the human state brings about the further condition of men, beasts etc., down below, and of divinities etc., up above.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Urdhva-mulam etc.  Adhas ca etc. In other scriptural texts it is delcared  'All is the holy Fig-tree; that alone is to be meditated upon'.  The present verse tells us this :  What is intended by that declaration is only the religious meditation of the Brahman, the Bhagavat.  Root :  the one with a highly tranil nature.  That is high (above) :  Becasue it can be attained by him alone who has withdrawn himself from every other [lower] thing.  The [Vedic] hymns are the leaves  [of it] etc. :  Just as the girth, height, the fruits and the taste etc. of a tree are indicated by its leaves, in  the same fashion the idea of the Brahman-being is through the scriptures that are included in the 'Vedic hymns'.  This is what is narrated here.  With Strands :  i.e., with the Sattva etc.  Well developed : i.e., starting from gods down to the stationary ones.  Of this tree, the roots, that are below, are the good and bad actions.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sakhah, the branches, as it were; tasya, of that Tree; prasrtah, extending; adhah, downwards, from the human beings to the immobile (trees etc.); ca, and; urdhvam, upwards, upto Brahma-beginning from the Creator of the Cusmos to Dharma (Death) [According to A.G. 'human beings' stands for the world of human beings, and 'Brahma ' for the 'world of Brahma' (Satva-loka). So Dharma may mean the 'world of Death' (pitr-loka).-Tr.], which, 'in accordance with their work and in conformity with their knowledge' (Ka. 2.2.7), are the results of knowledge and actions; are guna-pravrddhah, strengthened, made stout, by the alities sattva, rajas and tamas, which are their materials; and visaya-pravalah, have the sense-objects as their shoots. The sense-objects (sound etc.) sprout, as it were, like new leaves from the branches (bodies etc.) which are the results of actions. Thery the branches are said to have sense-objects as their shoots.
The supreme Root, the material cause of the Tree of the World, has been stated earlier. And now, the latent impressions of attraction, repulsion, etc. born of the results of action are the subsidiary roots, as it were, which grow later on and become the cause of involvement in righteousness and and unrighteousness. And those mulani, roots; karma-anubandhini, which are followed by actions; anu-santatani, spread, enter; adhah, downwards, as compared with the world of gods; manusya-loke, into the world of human beings particularly-for it is well known that (only) here men have competence for rites and duties. They (these roots) are said to be karma-anubandhini since actions (karma) that are characterized as righteous and unrighteous follow as their product (anubandha), (i.e.) succeed the rise of those (attraction, repulsion, etc.).

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha explains that elements exist in subtle forms in the unmanifest cause as well. The branches spread downward in worlds like Patala and upward in heaven. The sense-objects are called buds because they yield momentary pleasure. The roots are the Lord Himself who rewards beings based on their actions.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that the branches are the Jivas, both virtuous and wicked, who are nourished by the Gunas. The sense-objects are the leaves. The secondary roots in this world are the Jivas' mental impressions (Vasanas) which bind them to actions. Acts done in the human body lead to higher births as gods or lower births as beasts.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that the branches are the Jivas; the wicked ones spread downwards to animal births and the virtuous ones spread upwards to heaven. They are nourished by the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas). The sense-objects are the buds. The secondary roots are the mental impressions (Vasanas) of attraction and repulsion which bind humans to actions in this human world.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the Jivas are the branches; the evil-doers spread downwards into animal births and the righteous spread upwards into divine births. They are nourished by the Gunas. The sense-objects are the buds. The secondary roots are the latent impressions (Vasanas) of past enjoyments, which bind humans to actions in the human world where eligibility for actions exists.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that the branches are the various results of action and worship, spreading downwards to hell and upwards to Satyaloka. They are nourished by the three Gunas. The secondary roots are the impressions of attraction and repulsion born of past actions, which bind humans to actions in the human world.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the branches represent the Jivas' bodies, extending down to animal births and up to Gandharvas and gods, nourished by Gunas. The twigs are sense-objects. The secondary roots are actions done in the human state, which bind men to future births in higher or lower realms. The human realm is the field of action.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that the branches are the Jivas, spreading below in various species and above in divine incarnations. They are nourished by the Sattvika and other Gunas. The sense-objects are the buds. The secondary roots are the Jivas' worldly actions and attachments, which are established for the sake of creation in the world of men.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the branches spread down to hell and up to Hiranyagarbha, nourished by Gunas. The sense-objects are the delicate buds. The secondary roots are the latent impressions (Vasanas) of past actions, which bind Jivas to actions in this human world, creating a continuous cycle of actions and impressions.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the three modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of the senses. This tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to the fruitive actions of human society.

 The description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its branches spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there are variegated manifestations of living entities – human beings, animals, horses, cows, dogs, cats, etc. These are situated on the lower parts of the branches, whereas on the upper parts are higher forms of living entities: the demigods, Gandharvas and many other higher species of life. As a tree is nourished by water, so this tree is nourished by the three modes of material nature. Sometimes we find that a tract of land is barren for want of sufficient water, and sometimes a tract is very green; similarly, where particular modes of material nature are proportionately greater in quantity, the different species of life are manifested accordingly. The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. By development of the different modes of nature we develop different senses, and by the senses we enjoy different varieties of sense objects. The tips of the branches are the senses – the ears, nose, eyes, etc. – which are attached to the enjoyment of different sense objects. The twigs are sound, form, touch, and so on – the sense objects. The subsidiary roots are attachments and aversions, which are by-products of different varieties of suffering and sense enjoyment. The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered to develop from these secondary roots, which spread in all directions. The real root is from Brahmaloka, and the other roots are in the human planetary systems. After one enjoys the results of virtuous activities in the upper planetary systems, he comes down to this earth and renews his karma, or fruitive activities for promotion. This planet of human beings is considered the field of activities.