Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
pṛthaktvena tu yajjñānaṃ nānābhāvānpṛthagvidhān .
vetti sarveṣu bhūteṣu tajjñānaṃ viddhi rājasam

Word Meanings:
पृथक्त्वेन - as different from one
तु - but
यत् - which
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
नानाभावान् - various entities
पृथग्विधान् - of distinct kinds
वेत्ति - knows
सर्वेषु - all
भूतेषु - in beings
तत् - that
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
विद्धि - know
राजसम् - Rajasic.

Life Application:
Knowledge which sees distinct manifold entities of diverse kinds in all beings—is Rajasic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
But that knowledge which sees in all beings various entities of distinct kinds as different from one another, know that knowledge to be Rajasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
But that knowledge which sees in all beings various entities of distinct kinds as different from one another  know thou that knowledge to be Rajasic.

पृथक्त्वेन as different from one another? तु but? यत् which? ज्ञानम् knowledge? नानाभावान् various entities? पृथग्विधान् of distinct kinds? वेत्ति knows? सर्वेषु (in) all? भूतेषु in beings? तत् that? ज्ञानम् knowledge? विद्धि know? राजसम् Rajasic.Commentary Knowledge which sees As knowledge cannot be an agent? this should be interpreted to mean knowledge by which one sees.Entities Selves or souls.Different from one another Regarding them as different in different bodies.The knowledge that is led by the idea of separateness is passionate. Enveloping as it does the manifold creation with the veil of separateness? it deludes even the wise man. Owing to passionate knowledge? beings appear to be separate and the perception of unity is also lost sight of. That knowledge which beholds multiplicity in created objects and differentiates them as being small or great? according to their form and size? is of passionate nature and tainted. A man with passionate knowledge sees diversity everywhere. He beholds the many only.Now I will explain to thee? O Arjuna? knowledge that is of the ality of darkness? in order that thou mayest avoid it.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The knowledge which thinks of the manifold existence in all beings as separate - that comes from Passion.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
When we look at the world through the senses, mind, and intellect, we undoubtedly perceive infinite divisions. However, taking what is seen at face value as the ultimate truth is a sign of lack of wisdom. Since the mind of a rajasic person is always restless and unstable, they can never contemplate calmly. Consequently, they mistake visual distinctions (plants, animals, humans, etc.) as completely separate and absolute realities. Such knowledge is called Rajasic.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
That instrument-of-knowledge, by means of which one considers the varied natures of different sorts in all beings as [really] different-that is regarded to be of the Rajas (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
But that knowledge which sees all beings, by reason of their individuality, as entities of distinct nature - know that knowledge to be Rajasika.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
But know that knowledge to be originating from rajas which, amidst all things, apprehends the different entities of various kinds as distinct [As possessing distinct selves.].

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The dualistic views which perceive distinct souls in each body, and regard them as inherently different, are Rajasic. Such knowledge does not lead to liberation.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
But that knowledge which sees in all beings various entities of distinct kinds as different from one another, know that knowledge to be Rajasic.

Commentary: Rajasic knowledge is dominated by attachment (raga). Attachment creates likes and dislikes. Due to this, the seeker sees the immutable Atman in all different moving and non-moving creatures (humans, gods, animals, plants) as separate, based on their shapes, temperaments, names, and qualities. Such knowledge fails to distinguish between the sentient and insentient.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Whatever knowledge perceives in Brahmana etc., at the time of work, the entity known as the Atman as of diverse nature because the bodies of those beings are tall or fair and are fit to attain the fruits of work - know that knowledge to be Rajasika. The point is this:  It is not a condemnation of the plurality of Atman. The Atman, though distinct, is uniform everywhere. The bodily attributes do not affect it. The knowledge lacking this understanding is stigmatised as Rajasa.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.20–18.22 jointly): Sarvabhutesu etc. upto samudahrtam.  In the classified ones : i.e.,  [classified] as gods, human beings, etc.  Considers as [really] different :  i.e., with the thought  'Here on this depends my pleasure; here in that lies my displeasure'.  Without reason :  To take recourse to wrath, desire etc., slavishly under the influence of one's own addiction and also without examining the cause, in named as a thing born of the Tamas (Strand).

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tu, but; viddhi, know; tat, that; jnanam, knowledge; to be rajasam, originating from rajas; yat, which; sarvesu bhutesu, amidst all things; vetti, apprehends-since knowledge cannot be an agent of hends-since knowledge cannot be an agent of action, therefore the meaning implied is, 'that, knowledge৷৷.through which one apprehends৷৷.'-; nana-bhavan, the different entities; prthagvidhan, of various kinds, i.e., those possessing diverse characteristics and different from oneself; prthakrvena, as distinct, as separate in each body.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
That knowledge which distinguishes the Self as different in different beings is Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
That knowledge which perceives the fivefold inherent differences (between souls, between soul and God, etc.) as absolute, is Rajasic. It is dominated by the sense of division.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
That knowledge which views the individual selves (kshetrajnas) in different bodies as inherently distinct and possessing diverse qualities like happy, sad, etc., is Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Beholding the self as distinct in each body, which is the view of the logicians, is Rajasic knowledge. It is opposed to non-dualism and does not lead to liberation.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Apprehending souls as different due to the differences of the bodies (caste, stages of life) is Rajasic knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The knowledge which perceives multiple individual souls as having different desires and qualities like happy, sad, is Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Viewing the fivefold non-philosophical difference (between soul and soul, soul and God, etc.) as absolute due to distinct forms like god, human, etc., is Rajasic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
That knowledge by which one sees that in every different body there is a different type of living entity you should understand to be in the mode of passion.

 The concept that the material body is the living entity and that with the destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed is called knowledge in the mode of passion. According to that knowledge, bodies differ from one another because of the development of different types of consciousness, otherwise there is no separate soul which manifests consciousness. The body is itself the soul, and there is no separate soul beyond the body. According to such knowledge, consciousness is temporary. Or else there are no individual souls, but there is an all-pervading soul, which is full of knowledge, and this body is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this body there is no special individual or supreme soul. All such conceptions are considered products of the mode of passion.