Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
aśraddhayā hutaṃ dattaṃ tapastaptaṃ kṛtaṃ ca yat .
asadityucyate pārtha na ca tatprepya no iha

Word Meanings:
अश्रद्धया - without faith
हुतम् - is sacrificed
दत्तम् - given
तपः - austerity
तप्तम् - is practised
कृतम् - performed
च - and
यत् - whatever
असत् - unreal
इति - thus
उच्यते - is called
पार्थ - O Partha
न - not
च - and
तत् - that
प्रेत्य - hereafter
न - not
इह - here.

Life Application:
Whatever is offered, given, or done without faith is called 'Asat'; it is of no value here or hereafter.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Whatever oblation is offered, whatever gift is given, whatever austerity is practiced, and whatever action is performed without faith, is called 'ASAT', O Partha; it is of no consequence here or hereafter.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Whatever is sacrificed, given or performed, and whatever austerity is practised without faith, it is called 'Asat', O Arjuna; it is naught here or hereafter (after death).

अश्रद्धया without faith? हुतम् is sacrificed? दत्तम् given? तपः austerity? तप्तम् is practised? कृतम् performed? च and? यत् whatever? असत् Asat? इति thus? उच्यते is called? पार्थ O Partha? न not? च and? तत् that? प्रेत्य hereafter (after death)? न not? इह here.Commentary Asat That which changes form and has no permanent existence. It does not mean nonexistence as such.Acts of sacrifice? austerity and gift that are performed without faith? under pressure? or to prevent some sort of trouble or to gratify a craving? are Asat in their nature. They yield no permanent benefit or fruit to anybody.Any sacrifice? austerity or gift done without dedicating it to the Lord will be of no avail to the doer in this earthly life here or in the life beyond hereafter. It would be as useless as showers of rain falling on rocky ground or pouring oblations of ghee (clarified butter) on cold ashes. If you have no faith you will become egoistic and obstinate. Your heart will become hard. If you perform even hundreds of sacrifices without faith? without the spirit of selfsurrender to the Lord? even if you distribute the wealth of the whole world in charity without faith in and devotion to the Lord? all these would be worthless and useless. The sages will not appreciate such sacrifices or gifts. Energy? money and time are simply wasted.Thus in the Upanishads of the glorious Bhagavad Gita? the science of the Eternal? the scripture of Yoga? the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna? ends the seventeenth discourse entitledThe Yoga of the Division of the Threefold Faith. ,

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Whatsoever is done without faith, whether it be sacrifice, austerity or gift or anything else, as called Asat' (meaning Unreal') for it is the negation of Sat,' O Arjuna! Such an act has no significance, here or hereafter."

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In this verse, the Lord declares in negative terms that any action performed without faith is completely fruitless both in this world and the next. The quality and fruit of any action depend entirely on the doer's faith, enthusiasm, and conviction. Actions without faith are 'ASAT' (unreal), and no real good can ever emerge from them.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Without faith, whatever oblation is offered, what-ever gift is made, whatever austerity is practised, and whatever action is undertaken, that is called ASAT and it is of no avail after one's death and in this world.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Whatever offering or gift is made, whatever austerity is practised and whatever action is performed without faith, that is called Asat, O Arjuna. It is naught here or hereafter.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O son of Prtha, whatever is offered in sacrifice and given in charity, as also whatever austerity is undertakne or whatever is done without, faith, is said to be of on avail. And it is of no conseence after death, nor here.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya quotes from Rgveda-khila to show that actions performed without desiring their fruits, but with devotion to Brahman, are declared as 'Sat' by the gods. Conversely, actions without faith are completely fruitless.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that if the recitation of the triple name could rectify any defect, one might think faith is not crucial. However, the Lord clarifies that actions performed without faith are completely 'ASAT' (unreal). They produce no spiritual merit (apurva) hereafter and bring no fame here, being condemned by the wise. Thus, faith is the prime requirement for spiritual progress, while the triple name rectifies accidental defects in a faithful person's actions.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Partha, whatever offering is poured into the fire, whatever charity is given, whatever austerity is practiced, and whatever action is performed without faith, is called 'ASAT'. It is of no consequence here or hereafter.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that performing actions without faith in God, Sastras, or the next world renders them 'Asat'. People do them only for social prestige or show. Such actions do not bring the material rewards of heaven (for rajasic/tamasic actions done without faith) nor do they purify the heart for God-realization. While sinful actions yield bad results anyway due to attachment, performing good actions without faith is punished by making those actions completely fruitless. Thus, faith in the Supreme is the foundation of all righteous actions.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Offerings etc., when performed without faith, are Asat (i.e., unreal, bereft of efficiency), although they might be what has been enjoined by the Sastras. Why so?  Because it is naught here or hereafter; it will not lead to release nor to any desirable result in Samsara.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Whatever is performed without faith is 'ASAT' (inauspicious and non-praiseworthy). Thus, those who perform actions with faith easily attain welfare and peace.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O son of Prtha, whatever is hutam, offered in sacrifice, poured as oblation; and dattam, given in charity to Brahmanas,without faith; whatever tapah, austerity; is taptam, performed without faith; so also, whatever is krtam, done without faith, e.g. praise, salutation, etc.; all that ucyate, is said to be; asat iti, of no avail, since it is outside th course of discipline leading to Me. Ca, and, although involving great effort; na ca tat, it is of no conseence; pretya, after death, for producing (some) result; na, nor even for any result; iha, because it is condemned by the wise. [Thus it is established in this chapter that, among persons who are not at all versed in the scriptures, but are possessed of (either of the) three characterisitcs of sattva, (rajas) etc., only those shall attain to Liberation who steadfastly resort to sattva alone by partaking of sattvika food, (performing sattvika) sacrifices) etc. to te exclusion of rajasika and tamasika food etc., who destroy any defect that might arise in sacrifice etc. by uttering the names of Brahman, who have fully purified their intellect, and who have attained to the realization of Truth arising from one's being endowed with such disciplines as hearing and and thinking (sravana, manana) of, and meditation (nididhyasana) on Brahman.]

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that any oblation, charity, or austerity performed without scriptural faith is 'ASAT' (fruitless). Since it does not produce happiness in either this world or the next, it is completely useless.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that if one believes that chanting 'OM TAT SAT' can rectify any defect, they might think faith is unnecessary. However, the Lord declares that anything done without faith is 'ASAT'. Chanting 'OM TAT SAT' cannot purify actions done with deliberate faithlessness. Such actions produce no unseen merit (apurva) for the next world and yield no fame here due to condemnation by the wise. Thus, faith is the prerequisite, and the triple name is meant to rectify accidental defects of a faithful seeker.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that to encourage faith in all actions, the Lord condemns faithless actions. Whatever is offered, given, or practiced without faith is 'ASAT'. It yields no fruit hereafter because it is deficient, and no fruit here because it brings no fame.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that faith is the primary requirement for all rituals. Whatever is offered or done without faith is 'ASAT' because it lies outside the path of God-realization. Such actions do not yield fruits hereafter nor do they bring fame here. Wise seekers of liberation must completely avoid faithlessness.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that just as chapter 17 began by showing that scriptural actions done without faith are demoniac (asat), this verse reinforces that scriptural actions without faith yield no fruit. They do not lead to liberation (hereafter) nor do they produce desirable worldly fruits (here). Thus, only Veda-enjoined actions performed with faith must be practiced.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that anything performed without faith is 'ASAT'. Since there is no connection with the Lord, such actions do not yield fruits in the next world. Nor do they yield fruits here because they are disregarded by the virtuous. Therefore, only actions linked with the Lord must be performed.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that faith is the cause of all goodness in actions. Whatever sacrifice, charity, or austerity is performed without faith is 'ASAT' (non-existent/useless). It serves no purpose after death nor here in this world. Therefore, one must take shelter in sattvic faith alone.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Anything done as sacrifice, charity or penance without faith in the Supreme, O son of Pṛthā, is impermanent. It is called asat and is useless both in this life and the next.

 Anything done without the transcendental objective – whether it be sacrifice, charity or penance – is useless. Therefore in this verse it is declared that such activities are abominable. Everything should be done for the Supreme in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Without such faith, and without the proper guidance, there can never be any fruit. In all the Vedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is advised. In the pursuit of all Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is the understanding of Kṛṣṇa. No one can obtain success without following this principle. Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in Kṛṣṇa consciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. That is the way to make everything successful. In the conditional state, people are attracted to worshiping demigods, ghosts, or Yakṣas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than the modes of passion and ignorance, but one who takes directly to Kṛṣṇa consciousness is transcendental to all three modes of material nature. Although there is a process of gradual elevation, if one, by the association of pure devotees, takes directly to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is the best way. And that is recommended in this chapter. To achieve success in this way, one must first find the proper spiritual master and receive training under his direction. Then one can achieve faith in the Supreme. When that faith matures, in course of time, it is called love of God. This love is the ultimate goal of the living entities. One should therefore take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness directly. That is the message of this Seventeenth Chapter. Thus end the Bhaktivedanta s to the Seventeenth Chapter of the Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā in the matter of the Divisions of Faith.