Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śrībhagavānuvāca .
prakāśaṃ ca pravṛttiṃ ca mohameva ca pāṇḍava .
na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

Word Meanings:
प्रकाशम् - light
च - and
प्रवृत्तिम् - activity
च - and
मोहम् - delusion
एव - even
च - and
पाण्डव - O Arjuna
न - not
द्वेष्टि - hates
सम्प्रवृत्तानि - gone forth
न - not
निवृत्तानि - when absent
काङ्क्षति - longs.

Life Application:
He who does not hate illumination, activity, or delusion when present, nor long for them when absent...

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The Blessed Lord said: O Pandava, he (the wise one) does not hate illumination, activity, and delusion when they are present, nor does he long for them when they cease.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Blessed Lord said  When light, activity and delusion are present, he hates them not, nor does he long for them when they are absent.

प्रकाशम् light? च and? प्रवृत्तिम् activity? च and? मोहम् delusion? एव even? च and? पाण्डव O Arjuna? न not? द्वेष्टि hates? सम्प्रवृत्तानि (when) gone forth? न not? निवृत्तानि when absent? काङ्क्षति longs.Commentary This is the answer to Arjunas first estion. Light is the effect of Sattva? activity of Rajas and delusion of Tamas. The liberated sage does not hate them when they are present. When Sattva shines he is not carried away by pride. He does not think? I am a vey learned man. When the impulse for action is awakened in the body or when there is a divine call for him to do work for the solidarity of the world (Lokasangraha) he does not hate any action and he does not regret it after the action is accomplished. He feels no remorse while performing actions. The work is like the play of a child. While inertia increases in him? he is not deluded by infatuation.Only an ignorant man thinks Tamas has entered into me. I am deluded. I am under the influence of heedlessness? torpor? sloth? laziness and indolence. Now I am under the influence of Rajas. I am forced to do activities. This is painful. I have fallen from my true nature. This gives me a lot of pain. Now Sattva predominates in me. I am attached to happiness and knowledge. I am proud of my learning and better status.The liberated sage who has transcended the Gunas does not thus hate them when they are present.A man of Sattva or Rajas or Tamas longs for light? action or inertia which first manifested themselves and disappeared. But a liberated sage or one who has gone beyond the three alities does not at all long for these states which have vanished. This mark or characteristic is an internal mental state. It cannot be perceived or detected by others. It can be felt by ones own self alone. If one is endowed with clairvoyant vision or the inner eye of intuition? he can directly behold the longins that arise in the mind of another man.In the following three verses the Lord gives His answer to Arjunas second estion What is the conduct of the sage who has crossed over the Gunas

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Lord Shri Krishna replied: O Prince! He who shuns not the Quality which is present, and longs not for that which is absent;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The upadhis (limitations) or objects that are the effects of the three gunas can only affect the three gunas themselves, not the Supreme Self beyond them. Therefore, even after attaining Self-knowledge, these upadhis continue to function as before and may be affected by the gunas. But the wise person does not identify with them in any way. Remaining ever established in equanimity under all circumstances is the primary characteristic of an experienced sage, and this is the essence of perfection.

Illumination (prakasha), activity (pravritti), and delusion (moha) are respectively the functions of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. Here, the three gunas are indicated through their functions. Generally, when an ignorant person experiences agitation (the effect of Rajas) or sleep and heedlessness (the effects of Tamas), he hates them; and when knowledge, happiness, and peace (effects of Sattva) are present, he clings to them. If Sattva subsides, he longs for it. The root cause of all this is ignorant identification with the three gunas.

The state of the wise man is entirely different. He knows that the witnessing Self is ever detached and untouched by the gunas and their functions. Thus, when Rajas and Tamas arise, he does not hate them, nor does he crave for Sattva when it appears. His peace and happiness do not depend upon the presence or absence of these gunas. A millionaire is not affected by gaining or losing twenty-five paise. He might bend down to pick up a coin, but he will not feel the intense joy that a poor man in the same situation would feel.

Thus, one who abandons identification with all upadhis and delights in Self-realization is called gunatita (beyond the gunas) or liberated. The sorrows of the world can never agitate him. Now, the Lord describes the conduct of such a wise person:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The Bhagavat said  O son of Pandu !  He does niether abhor nor crave for illumination, and exertion, and delusion too, as and when they arise or cease to be.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Lord said  He hates not illumination, nor activity nor even delusion, O Arjuna, while these prevail, nor longs for them when they cease.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The Blessed Lord said  O son of Pandu, he neither dislikes illumination (knowledge), activity and delusion when they appear, nor does he long for them when they disappear.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Prayo na dvesti na kanksati' -- The one who has transcended the gunas generally does not hate nor long for the effects of Rajas, Tamas, and Sattva. As stated in the Bhallaveya branch of Samaveda: 'He generally neither hates nor craves for the manifested gunas of rajas, tamas, and sattva. However, if subtle tamas enters, he rejects it, and he desires subtle sattva.' Also in Mokshadharma (Mahabharata): 'O best of kings, if gods and sages who are established in sattva were devoid of subtle sattva, they would be considered subject to modification (vikarika). How could a modified person reach Purushottama?' And further: 'O tiger among men, a sattvika person is firmly established in the goal of liberation.'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Recapitulating the nature of Arjuna's questions, the Blessed Lord presents the answer. The fully enlightened sage (samyag-darsi) does not hate illumination, activity, and delusion when they arise, nor does he crave for them when they cease. Perceiving them as non-self (anatma), he does not superimpose favorability or unfavorability on the Self, and thus neither gets agitated nor desires them. This characteristic is known through self-experience (subjective), not visible to others, since another person cannot perceive one's internal hatred or craving.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The Blessed Lord said: O Pandava, he who does not hate illumination, activity, and delusion when they are fully present, nor longs for them when they cease.

Commentary -- Prakasham cha: Light means the purity and clarity of the senses and inner instrument. Pravrittim cha: Activity represents the desireless functioning that naturally takes place in a person who has transcended the gunas. Moham eva cha: Delusion here refers to worldly oversight or perception of appearances without loss of Self-knowledge. Na dvesti sampravrittani na nivrittani kanksati: A gunatita person does not hate these mental modifications when they arise, nor does he crave them when they subside. He naturally remains detached from the coming and going of the gunas' modes, realizing his true unchangeable Self.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The Lord said  He does not hate the effects of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas known as illumination, activity and delusion respectively, when they are prevailing in regard to undesired things other than the self; nor longs for them when they cease, i.e., when desired things other than the self become unavailable. Hating things not conducive to the realisations of the self and longing for things conducive thereof, do not come under this law stated in the Verse.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Prakasam etc.  Of course the illumination etc., do exist in all as their respective attributive marks.  Yet, the men of Yoga do not rejoices in these illumination etc. Nor do they have any hatred [for them]. On the other hand, contemplating  'These exist as attributes merely of the body; and they are not capable of disturbing me.',  these persons transcend the Strands.						
 Hence  [the Bhagavat] says -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Na dvesti, he neither dislikes these; prakasam, illumination (knowledge), an effect of sattva; pravrttim, activity, an effect of rajas; and moham, delusion, an effect of tamas; sampravrttani, when they appear, when they fully emerge in the form of objects (of experience)-.
'In me has arisen a perception which is a result of tamas; thery I have become deluded'; so also, 'In me has risen (the inclination to) action which is painful and is born of rajas. By that rajas I have been actuated, carried away from my own nature. This is a matter of sorrow to me that there has been a deviation from my own nature'; similarly, 'The ality of sattva, in the form of illumination that is knowledge, binds me by attributing discrimination to me and making me attached to happiness'-(by thinking) in these ways one dislikes them because of his being not fully enlightened. The person who has transcended the alities does not dislike them in this manner.
Unlike a person having sattva etc., who longs for the effects of sattva etc. which withdraw themselves after becoming manifest to him, the person who has gone beyond the alities na kanksati, does not long for them in that way; nivrttani, when they disappear. This is the idea.
This is not an indication that can be perceived by others. What then? Since this characteristic is perceivable to oneself, it is merely subjective. For dislike or longing, which is a subjective experience of a person, is not seen by another.
Now, then, the Lord gives the reply to the estion, 'What is the behaviour of one who has gone beyond the alities?':

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
By 'prakasam ca pravrittim ca', it might seem that a gunatita person has absolutely no hatred or craving for the effects of Sattva etc. To dispel this misconception, it is clarified that he 'generally' has no hatred or craving. The gunas are twofold: gross and subtle. Gross gunas give rise to worldly illumination, activity, and delusion, whereas subtle gunas pertain to the Supreme Lord. Towards the former (gross), a gunatita generally has no hatred or longing, though due to prarabdha karma it may sometimes occur. Towards the latter (subtle sattva), craving indeed exists. If subtle tamas should enter by chance, he rejects it and longs for subtle sattva.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Thereupon, the Blessed Lord describes the nature, conduct, and state of being beyond the gunas in four verses starting with 'prakasam ca'. Illumination is sattvika, activity is rajasa, and delusion is tamasa. He does not hate these effects of the three gunas when they function in non-Self entities, nor does he long for them when they subside.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Recognizing Arjuna's desire to understand in a different manner, the Lord explains the characteristics of a gunatita in five verses. Illumination (effect of Sattva), activity (effect of Rajas), and delusion (effect of Tamas) -- even when these manifestations arise due to their respective causes and are painful, the wise one does not hate them thinking them to be painful; nor when they subside does he long for them thinking them to be pleasant, for he knows them to be false like a dream. One who is thus free from hatred and attraction is called gunatita. This mark is self-perceived and not discernible by others.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The Lord explains the characteristics of a gunatita in six verses. Illumination (effect of Sattva), activity (effect of Rajas), and delusion (effect of Tamas) -- when all these functions arise naturally, he who does not hate them out of a sense of pain, nor long for them out of a desire for pleasure when they cease, is called gunatita.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Replying to Arjuna's question, the Blessed Lord says: Illumination (effect of Sattva), activity (effect of Rajas), and delusion (effect of Tamas) -- when these emerge fully as objects of experience, the gunatita person does not hate them as an ignorant person does. An ignorant person thinks, 'A tamasic idea has arisen in me, I am deluded; rajasic activity has arisen, pulling me away from my nature; sattva binds me to happiness' -- thus the ignorant one experiences hatred toward them. But the sage who has true insight does not hate them when present, nor crave for them when they subside. This characteristic is subjective (self-experienced) and not directly observable by others.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The purport here is that objects other than the Self are of two kinds: desired (ista) and undesired (anista). It is well known in the world that hatred arises when undesired things or their means occur, and craving arises when means to desired things subside. Among these, he who does not hate the effects of the gunas that function as means to undesired goals, nor longs for those effects that have ceased after serving as means to desired goals, is gunatita.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The Lord speaks here to convey that everything happens by His divine qualities (will and pastime). The devotee does not hate the manifestations of illumination, activity, and delusion which arrive by the Lord's will, nor does he crave for them when they recede in the absence of the Lord's desire. Knowing that all is governed by divine will, he neither strives to abandon them as obstacles nor hankers after them. Such a person is called gunatita.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Answering the first question, the Lord says: Illumination, activity, and delusion are the effects of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas respectively. In the state of waking/outward consciousness (vyutthana), when these are fully present, the sage does not hate them; nor in the state of samadhi, when they subside, does he long for them. He is the supreme knower of Brahman, ever established in samadhi. Yoga Vasishtha mentions seven stages of Yoga (yoga-bhumis): Subheccha, Vicharana, Tanumanasa, Sattvapatti, Asansakti, Padarthabhavani, and Turyaga. The sage mentioned in this verse is ever in divine absorption, untouched by the arising or ceasing of mental modes.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O son of Pandu, the transcendental qualities such as light, activity, and delusion are present all around, but they are not hated or desired by Me.

 Arjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them one after another. In these verses, Kṛṣṇa first indicates that a person transcendentally situated has no envy and does not hanker for anything. When a living entity stays in this material world embodied by the material body, it is to be understood that he is under the control of one of the three modes of material nature. When he is actually out of the body, then he is out of the clutches of the material modes of nature. But as long as he is not out of the material body, he should be neutral. He should engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord so that his identity with the material body will automatically be forgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he acts only for sense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to Kṛṣṇa, sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need this material body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of the material body. The qualities of the material modes in the body will act, but as spirit soul the self is aloof from such activities. How does he become aloof? He does not desire to enjoy the body, nor does he desire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally situated, the devotee becomes automatically free. He need not try to become free from the influence of the modes of material nature. The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situated person. The materially situated person is affected by so-called honor and dishonor offered to the body, but the transcendentally situated person is not affected by such false honor and dishonor. He performs his duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and does not mind whether a man honors or dishonors him. He accepts things that are favorable for his duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, otherwise he has no necessity of anything material, either a stone or gold. He takes everyone as his dear friend who helps him in his execution of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and he does not hate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything on an equal level because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing to do with material existence. Social and political issues do not affect him, because he knows the situation of temporary upheavals and disturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He can attempt anything for Kṛṣṇa, but for his personal self he does not attempt anything. By such behavior one becomes actually transcendentally situated.