Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yaṃ hi na vyathayantyete puruṣaṃ puruṣarṣabha .
samaduḥkhasukhaṃ dhīraṃ so.amṛtatvāya kalpate

Word Meanings:
यम् - whom
हि - surely
न व्यथयन्ति - afflict not
एते - these
पुरुषम् - man
पुरुषर्षभ - chief among men
समदुःखसुखम् - same in pleasure and
धीरम् - firm man
सः - he
अमृतत्वाय - for immortality
कल्पते - is fit.

Life Application:
Practice maintaining equal composure during both unexpected setbacks and small victories throughout your day.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O best among men! That steadfast one, who remains the same in pain and pleasure, whom these do not afflict, becomes fit for immortality (liberation).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
That firm man whom, surely, these afflict not, O chief among men, to whom pleasure and pain are the same, is fit for attaining immortality.

यम् whom? हि surely? न व्यथयन्ति afflict not? एते these? पुरुषम् man? पुरुषर्षभ chief among men? समदुःखसुखम् same in pleasure and pain? धीरम् firm man? सः he? अमृतत्वाय for immortality? कल्पते is fit.Commentary -- Dehadhyasa or identification of the Self with the body is the cause of pleasure and pain. The more you are able to identify yourself with the immortal? allpervading Self? the less will you be affected by the pairs of opposites (Dvandvas? pleasure and pain? etc.)Titiksha or the power of endurance develops the willpower. Calm endurance in pleasure and pain? and heat and cold is one of the alifications of an aspirant on the path of Jnana Yoga. It is one of the Shatsampat or sixfold virtues. It is a condition of right knowledge. Titiksha by itself cannot give you Moksha or liberation? but still? when coupled with discrimination and dispassion? it becomes a means to the attainment of Immortality or knowledge of the Self. (Cf.XVII.53)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The hero whose soul is unmoved by circumstance, who accepts pleasure and pain with equanimity, only he is fit for immortality.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Enduring pleasure and pain with a calm mind is called titiksha, which, according to the Upanishads, is an essential quality for Self-realization. Keeping this in mind, Lord Krishna says that one endowed with such endurance becomes fit for liberation.

Here 'liberation' is expressed by the word 'immortality.' This word should not be understood as liberation of the gross body. It is used here in its wider sense. The body, mind and intellect, and all experiences gained through them, are indeed mortal and impermanent. Because of our identification with these limiting adjuncts, we are affected by their conditions of birth, death and the rest, and become sorrowful. Immortality means that the person who recognizes his own eternal Self-nature, even while undergoing all these experiences and living amidst them, does not fall into grief and delusion. He never forgets his own immortal nature.

Through the Gita, the great sage Vyasa, through Lord Krishna, tells us the goal of our life -- the attainment of perfection. In this brief life we have obtained, we must strive for the attainment of this goal. These very circumstances give us the opportunity to practice, cheerfully and without anxiety, the supreme discipline of enduring the pleasures and pains that come our way in life.

Titiksha does not mean enduring what happens with a despondent, dejected attitude -- this is not so. Here it is specifically said that the wise man, whose mind remains established in equanimity amid pairs of opposites such as cold and heat, becomes fit for liberation. The purpose here is not the endurance of a despairing person, but a thorough understanding of the ever-changing nature of the world. The discerning man gains the capacity neither to be overjoyed in pleasure nor deeply dejected in pain.

As long as we remain intensely attached to the body, we cannot detach ourselves from the pains that arise in it, and we become distressed. If bodily hardship becomes necessary due to the arising of love or hatred in the heart, we gain the capacity for it. Out of love for a son, when it becomes necessary to discipline him for his education, we are ready to give up our own bodily comforts most gladly; that inconvenience does not trouble us. Likewise, for the attainment of intellectually cherished ideals, we give up the comforts of body and mind. Many patriotic revolutionaries of the world have offered up their lives, enduring many hardships, for the attainment of their nation's ideal of freedom.

For the following reasons too it is fitting for you to give up grief and delusion, and calmly endure cold and the rest. Because...

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O the best among persons !  That wise person becomes immortal whom these (situations) do not trouble and to whom the pleasure and pain are eal.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
For, he whom these do not affect, O chief of men, and to whom pain and pleasure are the same - that steadfast man alone is worthy of immortality.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O (Arjuna, who are) foremost among men, verily, the person whom these do not torment, the wise man to whom sorrow and happhiness are the same  he is fit for Immortality.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Hence he states the purpose: 'yam hi...' -- one whom these sense-contacts do not afflict. Since absence of affliction pertains only to one dwelling in the body, 'purusha' is the qualifying word. How do they not afflict him? Because of his being equal in pleasure and pain. And how is this equanimity attained? Through steadfastness.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The objection arises that endurance (titikshutva) alone is not a fitting qualification for one entitled to this teaching, since endurance by itself is not the cause of the highest human goal -- this doubt is raised in 'shita...' The answer given is that endurance, accompanied by discrimination, dispassion and the rest, serves that goal (liberation) through the knowledge that is its cause -- this is explained in 'shrinu...' He shows the intended benefit for one who endures -- 'yam hi...' Being free of joy and sorrow is here said to consist in being endowed with tranquility and the other means -- through the word 'dhimantam' (the wise). Being endowed with discrimination between the eternal and non-eternal, and dispassion, are both indicated by this word. Having posited one qualified with the fourfold means as one who has the vision of the eternal Self, that is, knowledge of the meaning of the word 'you,' he states that such a person becomes fit for the knowledge of the sentence-meaning that is conducive to liberation -- this is said in 'sa nitya...'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Because, O best among men, Arjuna! that steadfast man who remains even-minded in pleasure and pain, whom these sense-contacts (objects) cannot afflict, becomes capable of immortality, that is, he becomes immortal.

Explanation -- 'Purusharshabha' -- man generally thinks only of changing his circumstances, though some circumstances can never be changed and cannot possibly be altered. When the situation of war arose, Arjuna, instead of thinking of changing it, has thought of his own true welfare. This very thinking of one's welfare is what makes one superior among men.

'Sama-duhkha-sukham dhiram' -- the steadfast man is even-minded in pleasure and pain. It is only through the modification of the inner faculty that pleasure and pain appear as two separate things. The conscious being (purusha) is the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain, and he becomes that cause by being situated in Prakriti (Gita 13.20-21). When he becomes established in his own true nature, there remains no one left to experience pleasure and pain. Hence, by being established in himself, he naturally becomes even-minded toward pleasure and pain.

'Yam hi na vyathayantyete purusham' -- these sense-contacts, that is, mere material objects of nature, cannot cause distress to the steadfast man. The pleasure arising from union with material objects is itself a form of distress, and the pain arising from separation from them is also a form of distress. But one whose vision is fixed on equanimity cannot be made happy or unhappy by these material objects. Through equanimity...

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
That person endowed with courage, who considers pain as inevitable as pleasure, and who performs war and such other acts suited to his station in life without attachment to the results and only as a means of attaining immortality - one whom the impact of weapons in war etc., which involve soft or harsh contacts, do not trouble, that person only attains immortality, not a person like you, who cannnot bear grief. As the selves are immortal, what is to be done here, is this much only. This is the meaning.

Because of the immortality of the selves and the natural destructibility of the bodies, there is no cause for grief. It was told (previously):  'The wise grieve neither for the dead nor for the living' (2. 11). Now the Lord elucidates the same view.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
But, because all these different situations are of the nature of coming and going, on that account itself are they not to be lamented on ?  It is not so.  As for instance :  What is this which is termed  'coming' ?  If it is  'birth', what is that  'birth' itself ?  It is wrong to say that is the same as gaining the self by what is non-existent.  For, to be of the nature of non-existence, is indeed to be devoid of every inherent nature and to be devoid of the very self.  If a thing is devoid of the self and devoid of every nature, how is it possible to convert it into what has an intrinsic nature ?  Surely, it is impossible to  convert  the non-blue into blue.  For, it is faulty and undesirable to covert  the non-blue into blue. For, it is faulty and undesirable to conclude that a thing  with certain in nature changes to be of a different nature.  Hence the scritpure goes -
 'The intrinsic nature of beings would not cease to
exist, e.g., the heat of the sun'. 
 On the other hand, if the 'birth' signifies the gaining of self just by what [really] exists, even then, why the lamentability on its coming ?  For, what has gained a self, could never be non-existent and conseently it would be eternal.
 
Likewise, is the act of  'going' also meant for the existent or the non-existent ?  What is non-existent is just non-existent  [for ever.]  How can there be a non-existence-nature even in the case of  that which is of the existence-nature ?  If it is said that it is of the non-existence-nature in the second moment; [since its birth], then it should be so even in the first moment; and so nothing would be existent.  For, the intrinsic nature  [ever] remains unabandoned.
 
But is it not that the destruction of it  (i.e., of a given thing, like a pot) is brought about by the stroke of a hammer etc.?  Yet, if that destruction is altogether different [from the existent one i.e. the pot], then what does it matter for what is existent ?  But, it is not be seen  [at that time] ?  Yet, what is actually existent (pot) may not be seen just as when it is covered with a cloth; but it has not turned to be altogether different.  In fact, it has been said [in the scriptures] that this is not different  [from the existent].  Summarising all these, [the Lord] says -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
What will happen to one who bears cold and heat? Listen: Verily, the person৷৷.,'etc.
(O Arjuna) hi, verily; yam purusam, the person whom; ete, these, cold and heat mentioned above; na, do not; vyathayanti, torment, do not perturb; dhiram, the wise man; sama-duhkha-sukham, to whom sorrow and happiness are the same, who is free from happiness and sorrow when subjected to pleasure and pain, because of his realization of the enternal Self; sah, he, who is established in the realization of the enternal Self, who forbears the opposites; kalpate, becomes fit; amrtattvaya, for Immortality, for the state of Immortality, i.e. for Liberation.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Therefore, in order to state what purpose is served for you by rendering the sense-contacts futile, he says: 'atah...' Since the absence of sorrow is possible merely by not fighting, why then, having fought, having abandoned false identification, is anything further needed for the absence of the sorrow that has arisen -- this remaining doubt is answered. In the previous verse, some have explained the word 'titikshasva' as merely 'endure'; this is not correct, since its repetition here is understood, rather, as 'render futile' -- with this in view, he explains the first quarter: 'yam...' 'Do not afflict' means do not disturb, do not produce the disparity in the form of cold, heat, pleasure and pain -- this is the sense. Since immortality is heard of even for women such as Maitreyi, the qualifier 'purusha' (man) might seem improper; hence he offers another explanation: 'puri...' -- one who, though connected with the body, still has the vision proper to the body -- this is the sense. For what purpose is even this qualification given? He says: 'sharire...' -- this qualification is given in order to remove the doubt that, since all ordinary people too, in deep sleep and the like, are free of false identification and hence free of affliction, they too would attain immortality. If it is said that one without identification with the body and the rest has neither pleasure nor pain, then why are the two qualifiers 'sama-duhkha-sukham' (equal in pleasure and pain) and 'dhiram' (steadfast) given for him, since this is already established from his previous state -- anticipating this objection, this restatement of the previous condition is meant to show the means to that state; hence, in due order, he raises the question and states the intent: 'katham...' By what means does the abandonment of false identification, through which the sense-contacts do not afflict, come about -- this is the sense. Just as pain is not to be sought, since it does not serve any true human end, so too pleasure derived from objects is likewise not to be sought, since it is opposed to immortality; one for whom both are thus equal is 'sama-duhkha-sukha.' In that state, how could there be, toward the causes of pleasure, an attachment in the form of viewing them as favorable, and toward their opposites, an aversion -- this is the sense. And by what means is this very equanimity toward pleasure and pain attained...

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Endurance alone is the cause of immortality, he says -- 'yam hi...': whom these do not afflict, that steadfast man becomes worthy of immortality.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
If the objection arises that if the inner faculty (antahkarana) itself is the substrate of pleasure, pain and the rest, then it alone must be granted consciousness through agency and enjoyership, and since there is no proof of any distinct illuminator-enjoyer (the Self) apart from it, the dispute would be merely verbal; and if such a distinct Self is granted, then bondage and liberation would end up residing in different substrates -- since the inner faculty, being the substrate of pleasure and pain, is bound, while the Self, distinct from it, is free -- to remove this doubt of Arjuna's, the Lord speaks: 'yam,' one self-established through self-luminosity, per the scripture 'here this Person is self-luminous'; 'purusham,' one who, in fullness, lies in the city (of the body), per the scripture 'this same Person lies in every city (body); nothing whatsoever is unpervaded by Him, nothing whatsoever is unencompassed by Him.' 'Sama-duhkha-sukham,' for whom pleasure and pain, appearing merely as attributes not belonging to the Self, are alike, since he, being unmodified and self-luminous, is untouched by them. The mention of pleasure and pain here represents all the modifications of the inner faculty. Per the scripture 'this is the eternal glory of the knower of Brahman -- it does not increase through action, nor does it diminish,' increase and decrease in the form of pleasure and pain are thereby denied of the Self. 'Dhiram,' by the etymology 'one who impels the intellect (dhi),' means, through the reflection of consciousness, the impeller of the intellect via false identification with it -- that is, the witness of the intellect. Per the scripture 'that steadfast one, having become the dream-self, passes beyond this world,' the possibility of bondage is thereby shown. Since these pleasure-and-pain-giving sense-contacts do not, in ultimate truth, afflict, that is, do not really modify him -- since, being the illuminator of all modifications, he is incapable of modification himself -- just as the sun, though the eye of the entire world, is untouched by external faults...

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Even more than the effort to counteract them, mere endurance of them is proper, since it bears great fruit -- he says, in 'yam...': that person whom these sense-contacts do not afflict, do not overpower, for whom pleasure and pain are equal, that person, undisturbed by them, becomes fit, through knowledge of dharma, for immortality, that is, liberation.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He states the fruit of endurance: 'yam...' -- one for whom pleasure and pain are equal, the steadfast one, possessed of eternal Self-knowledge -- it is precisely because of this eternal Self-knowledge that cold, heat and the rest do not move him. Although it would have been fitting to say 'these sense-contacts' do not disturb, still, without producing cold and the like, they do not afflict; hence the commentator, by the word 'etat,' refers only to cold and the rest. That person, endowed with the fourfold means and established in the vision of the eternal Self, becomes fit for immortality, that is, liberation. By saying 'do not afflict the person,' and thereby indicating 'you indeed are the best of men,' he says, by the vocative 'purusharshabha.' Here some explain as follows: we do not dispute the Self's eternality and pervasiveness; but we do not accept oneness across every body. Thus the Vaisheshikas hold that Selves, possessed of nine special qualities -- cognition, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, effort, merit and demerit -- are distinct in each body, though still eternal and pervasive. The logicians and Mimamsakas hold the same view. The Sankhyas, though differing otherwise, do not dispute the Self's distinctness in each body, since otherwise pleasure and pain would become confounded. Thus, even though I, distinct from Bhishma and the rest, am eternal and pervasive, since I too am subject to pleasure and pain, the severance of kinsmen's bodies would cause loss of pleasure and onset of pain -- so why is grief improper? Anticipating this thought of Arjuna's, he speaks, for the discernment of the subtle body: 'yam...' -- one self-established through self-luminosity, the Person who, in fullness, lies in the city (of the body), for whom pleasure and pain, appearing merely as attributes not belonging to the Self, are equal; the steadfast one, by the etymology 'one who impels the intellect (dhi)' -- through the reflection of consciousness, the impeller of the intellect via false identification with it, that is, the witness of the intellect. By this, the possibility of bondage is shown. Since these pleasure-and-pain-giving sense-contacts do not afflict, do not truly modify him, that person becomes fit for immortality, that is, liberation -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
owing to the arrival of unavoidable sorrows. 'Kartavyam' (must be done) -- if not done, there would be absence of the liberating fruit, sin from abandoning one's own dharma, and the occasion of infamy and the like arising from lack of steadfastness -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
On the inquiry as to what fruit this endurance bears, he says: 'yam hi na vyathayantyeta...' O Purusharshabha, best among men, one capable of the independent means to liberation -- that person for whom union and separation, i.e. pleasure and pain, are equal, that steadfast one, capable of enduring these -- these sense-contacts do not afflict him, do not overpower him; that person becomes fit for immortality, that is, liberation. Or, he becomes fit for devotion, for the state of liberation -- that is, he becomes worthy of attaining devotion. Because of his equanimity toward pleasure and pain, everything appears, by his very will, in the form of bliss alone -- this is thereby conveyed.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
That endurance bears a directly perceptible fruit, he says, in 'yam hi...': these sense-contacts, threefold in the manner previously explained, do not afflict the person, do not dislodge him from his composure, whether in waking, dream, or unconscious trance. 'Purusha' means one who dwells in the eight 'cities' (puras) -- the five organs of action, the five organs of knowledge, the fourfold mind and the rest, the five vital breaths, space and the rest, desire, action, and the eighth, darkness (tamas) -- these are well known. Or, since all the rest are already included between the gross and subtle bodies, here 'pura' should be taken to mean tamas alone; by this, the Self's distinctness even from the causal adjunct is shown. By saying 'Purusharshabha,' he indicates that you too are fit to experience this, being the best among all men. One for whom pleasure and pain are equal, precisely through abandonment of the three adjuncts. For one established in samadhi, the contact of cold and heat produces neither pleasure nor pain -- hence this equanimity toward pleasure and pain is entirely fitting for him. These do not afflict the steadfast one, the meditating yogi. He becomes fit for immortality, that is, liberation.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation.

 Anyone who is steady in his determination for the advanced stage of spiritual realization and can equally tolerate the onslaughts of distress and happiness is certainly a person eligible for liberation. In the varṇāśrama institution, the fourth stage of life, namely the renounced order ( sannyāsa ), is a painstaking situation. But one who is serious about making his life perfect surely adopts the sannyāsa order of life in spite of all difficulties. The difficulties usually arise from having to sever family relationships, to give up the connection of wife and children. But if anyone is able to tolerate such difficulties, surely his path to spiritual realization is complete. Similarly, in Arjuna’s discharge of duties as a kṣatriya, he is advised to persevere, even if it is difficult to fight with his family members or similarly beloved persons. Lord Caitanya took sannyāsa at the age of twenty-four, and His dependents, young wife as well as old mother, had no one else to look after them. Yet for a higher cause He took sannyāsa and was steady in the discharge of higher duties. That is the way of achieving liberation from material bondage.