Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍhabhāvo dṛṣṭvā rūpaṃ ghoramīdṛṅmamedam .
vyapetabhīḥ prītamanāḥ punastvaṃ tadeva me rūpamidaṃ prapaśya

Word Meanings:
मा - not
ते - thee
व्यथा - fear
मा - not
च - and
विमूढभावः - bewildered state
दृष्ट्वा - having seen
रूपम् - form
घोरम् - terrible
ईदृक् - such
मम - My
इदम् - this
व्यपेतभीः - with fear dispelled
प्रीतमनाः - with gladdened heart
पुनः - again
त्वम् - thou
तत् - that
एव - even
मे - My
रूपम् - form
इदम् - this
प्रपश्य - behold.

Life Application:
Let your fear and bewilderment dissipate as you behold God returning to His gentle, reassuring form.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Do not be distressed or bewildered by seeing this terrible form of Mine. Becoming free from fear and with a gladdened mind, behold again that same (former) form of Mine.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Be not afraid, nor bewildered on seeing such a teriible form of Mine as this; with thy fear dispelled and with a gladdened heart, now behold again this former form of Mine.

मा not? ते thee? व्यथा fear? मा not? च and? विमूढभावः bewildered state? दृष्ट्वा having seen? रूपम् form? घोरम् terrible? ईदृक् such? मम My? इदम् this? व्यपेतभीः with (thy) fear dispelled? प्रीतमनाः with gladdened heart? पुनः again? त्वम् thou? तत् that? एव even? मे My? रूपम् form? इदम् this? प्रपश्य behold.Commentary Former form is the form with four hands with conch? discus? club or mace and lotus.The Lord was Arjuna in a state of terror. Therefore? He withdrew the Cosmic Form and assumed His usual gentle form. He consoled Arjuna and spoke sweet? loving words.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Be not afraid or bewildered by the terrible vision. Put away thy fear and, with joyful mind, see Me once again in My usual Form."

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Whenever an opportunity arises, Vyasaji's dramatic genius never fails to reach its perfection. Here is an example of such an artistic picture, which Vyasaji has painted with words on the canvas of the Gita. Arjuna's mental agitations are dramatically depicted here in these words of the Lord: 'Do not be afraid and bewildered by seeing this terrible form of Mine.' The Lord, consoling Arjuna with His sweet words and behavior, makes his mind calm and happy again. The Lord resumes His original form, indicating which He says: 'See that same form of Mine again.' This section, which describes the Lord's re-entry into His former gentle and peaceful form, must remind students of Vedanta of a Mahavakya. The oneness of the terrible cosmic form of the macrocosm (Samasti) and the gentle divine individual form (Vyasti) of Sri Krishna is beautifully shown by the statement that 'this is that same form of Mine'. In fact, the Supreme Truth which is expressed in the individual vehicle (Upadhi) of Sri Krishna is the same Truth in the cosmic form (Virat-rupa) as well, where it exists as the substratum of all names and forms. The ocean is the substratum of the waves. If the ocean is powerful, fierce, terrible and vast, the wave itself is modest and gentle, dear and attractive. Once again the scene is of Hastinapura, where in the palace, Sanjaya tells the blind, old Dhritarashtra that...

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Let there be no distress and no bewilderment in you by seeing this terrific and violent form of Mine; being free from fear, cheerful at heart, behold again this form of Mine which is the same [as before].

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
You need not fear any more, nor be perplexed, looking on this awesome form of Mine. Free from fear and with a gladdened heart, behold again that other form of Mine.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
May you have no fear, and may not there be bewilderment by seeing this form of Mine so terrible Becoming free from fear and gladdened in mind again, see this very earlier form of Mine.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having thus praised the vision of the Cosmic Form, the Lord says, 'Since you are afraid of what is being seen, I shall withdraw it' — 'Let there be no fear (distress) in you.' The word 'such' (idrk) is used to imply that it was experienced in many ways, and 'this' (idam) refers to its being directly perceptible. 'That very' (tadeva) is said in reference to 'this' (idam).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Seeing this terrible form of Mine, you should not be distressed nor should you be bewildered. Now, becoming free from fear and with a gladdened mind, behold again that very (four-armed) form of Mine.

Commentary—'mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍhabhāvo dṛṣṭvā rūpaṃ ghoramīdṛṅmamedam'—The warriors are rushing with great speed into My mouths which are terrifying due to terrible tusks, some of them are seen stuck between the teeth with their heads crushed, and I am licking them on all sides while devouring all people with My blazing mouths like the fire of dissolution—seeing such a terrible form of Mine, you should not be distressed, rather you should be pleased. The meaning is that earlier (in 11.45) when you were delighted seeing My grace, it was correct for you to be delighted due to your gaze being on My grace, but this distress is not correct.

To what Arjuna said earlier—'pravyathitās tathāham' (11.23) and 'pravyathitāntarātmā' (11.24), the Lord replies here—'mā te vyathā' (let there be no distress in you). I am showing such a form only out of grace. Seeing this, you should not be bewildered—'mā ca vimūḍhabhāvaḥ'. Secondly, I am indeed pleased and out of My pleasure alone I am showing you this form; but your repeatedly saying 'be pleased, be pleased' is your bewilderment. You should leave this. Thirdly, earlier you said that your delusion has gone (11.1), but actually your delusion has not yet gone. You should leave this delusion and, with a fearless and gladdened mind, see that divine form of Mine.

The dialogue between you and Me should be with joy, in a blissful and playful manner. There should be absolutely no fear and delusion in it. Even though I drive the chariot, talk, show the cosmic form, etc., according to your words, have you seen any distortion in Me? (Footnote p. 611.1) Has any difference come in Me? Similarly, seeing My cosmic form, no distortion should come in you either. O Arjuna! The fear you are feeling is only due to the presence of egoism and attachment ('I' and 'mine') towards the body, i.e., you are afraid lest the object of egoism and attachment (the body) be destroyed—this is your foolishness, your ignorance. You must leave this. Even today, whoever has fear of anyone, anywhere, it is only due to egoism and attachment towards the body. Due to egoism and attachment in the body, one wants to keep the perishable object (the life-force). This is the foolishness of man and this is the root of demoniac wealth (asuri sampatti). But those who walk towards God do not have attachment to life-forces; rather they have God-consciousness everywhere and have love only for God. Therefore, they become fearless. Their walking towards God is the root of divine wealth (daivi sampatti). Seeing the terrible form of Lord Nrisimha, all the demigods etc. were frightened, but Prahlada was not frightened because Prahlada had God-consciousness everywhere. Therefore, he went near Lord Nrisimha and fell at His feet, and the Lord lifted him up, took him on His lap, and began to lick him with His tongue!

'vyapetabhīḥ prītamanāḥ punastvaṃ tadeva me rūpamidaṃ prapaśya'—Arjuna had said in the forty-fifth verse—'bhayena ca pravyathitaṃ mano me'; hence the Lord has said 'vyapetabhīḥ' for 'bhayena', meaning 'be free from fear', and 'prītamanāḥ' for 'pravyathitaṃ manaḥ', meaning 'be of a gladdened mind'. The Lord is saying by using the word 'punah' (again) to behold that very four-armed form which the Lord had shown to Arjuna in the cosmic form. The significance of saying 'tadeva' (that very) is that you do not want to see Brahma, Shankara and other deities and the terrifying cosmic form along with the divine form (Vishnu-rupa), you only want to see the divine form, therefore, behold that very form well. According to Arjuna's prayer, the Lord wants to show the form now, for which He has used the word 'idam' (this) here.

How long did Sanjaya and Arjuna's divine vision last?

Vedas Vyasaji gave divine vision to Sanjaya at the beginning of the war (Footnote p. 611.2), with which he kept narrating the news of the war to Dhritarashtra. But in the end, when Sanjaya became overwhelmed with grief at Duryodhana's death, that divine vision of Sanjaya departed (Footnote p. 611.3).

Upon Arjuna's prayer to show the cosmic form, the Lord gave divine vision to Arjuna—'divyaṃ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ paśya me yogam aiśvaram' (11.8) and Arjuna began to see the divine, fierce, etc. forms of the cosmic-form Lord. When a very fierce form came before Arjuna, he became afraid and, praising and praying to the Lord, began to say that his mind is distressed with fear, please show me that very four-armed form. Then the Lord showed His four-armed form and then became two-armed. This proves that Arjuna's divine vision lasted only up to here (the forty-ninth verse). In the fifty-first verse, Arjuna himself says, 'Seeing Your gentle human form, I have become composed and have restored to my normal state.'

Here a doubt arises that Arjuna was distressed (agitated) even before—'dṛṣṭvā lokāḥ pravyathitās tathāham' (11.23), 'dṛṣṭvā hi tvāṃ pravyathitāntarātmā' (11.24); hence, his divine vision should have departed there itself. The solution to this is that there Arjuna was not so terrified as he is here. Here, Arjuna, being terrified, bows to the Lord again and again and also prays to Him to show the four-armed form (11.45). Therefore, here Arjuna's divine vision departs. Another reason can also be considered that earlier Arjuna had a special interest (desire) to see the cosmic form—'draṣṭum icchāmi te rūpam' (11.3), therefore the Lord gave divine vision to Arjuna; but here Arjuna no longer has the interest to see the cosmic form and due to being terrified, he desires to see the four-armed form, therefore (due to no further need for divine vision) his divine vision departs.

If Sanjaya and Arjuna had not been distressed (agitated) by grief and fear, their divine vision would have lasted for a long time and they would have seen much more. But due to being distressed by grief and fear, their divine vision departed. Similarly, when a man becomes attached to the world through delusion, then the intellect (viveka) given by God does not work. For example, if a man has too much attachment to money, he starts stealing, then with increasing attachment, he starts committing dacoity, and when the attachment increases excessively, he even murders others for money. In this way, as the delusion increases, his intellect fails to work. If a man, instead of getting trapped in delusion, had given importance to his intellect, he would have salvaged himself and become the savior of the entire world!

Relationship—In the previous verse, the Lord commanded Arjuna to see the form; accordingly, the Lord shows His Vishnu form—Sanjaya describes this in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Whatever fear and whatever perlexity have been caused to you by seeing My terrible form, may it cease now. I shall show you the benign form to which you were accustomed before. Behold now that form of Mine.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Ma te vyatha, may you have no fear; and ma vimudha-bhavah, may not there be bewilderment of the mind; drstva, by seeing, perceiving; idam, this rupam, 
form; mama, of Mine; idrk ghoram, so terrible, as was revealed. Vyapetabhih, becoming free from fear; and becoming prita-manah, gladdened in mind; punah, again; prapasya, see; idam, this; eva, very; tat, earlier; rupam, form; me, of Mine, with four hands, holding a conch, a discus and a mace, which is dear to you.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Moreover, let there be no distress etc. in you. This form is terrible because it is the form of Time (Kala-rupa). Since it causes fear in you, who are a devotee of the path of grace mixed with rules (pusti-misra-maryada-bhakta), behold this very form of Mine which was seen by you previously.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
If you are agitated by this form which has manifested for your grace, then the Lord says 'ma te' etc. Having seen this terrible and frightening form of Mine, which is equipped with many arms etc., may you have no distress (vyatha) – i.e., pain caused by fear. Similarly, even upon seeing My form, may there be no bewilderment (vimudha-bhavah) – i.e., agitation of mind and dissatisfaction. Instead, becoming free from fear (vyapetabhih) and gladdened in mind (pritamanah), see again this very four-armed form characterized by Vasudevah-hood etc., which was always seen by you before, and which is now being revealed by withdrawing the Cosmic Form. Behold (prapasya) it clearly, with complete absence of fear and with joy.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
If even after all this, you feel distressed upon seeing this terrible form of Mine, then the Lord says, 'I shall show you that very form' — hence He says 'ma te' etc. Let there be no distress in you upon seeing such a terrible form of Mine. Let there be no bewilderment either. Becoming free from fear and gladdened in mind, behold again that very form of Mine clearly.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
If there is distress etc. in you caused by the Cosmic Form shown for your pleasure, then the Lord says 'Behold that very form of Mine' — hence He says 'ma te' etc. Let there be no distress or fear in you upon seeing this terrible form of Mine. Let there be no bewilderment or agitation of mind either. Thus, being free from fear (free from distress) and gladdened in mind, behold clearly – for the removal of the distress etc. generated by the vision of the Cosmic Form – this very form of Mine, which is your beloved four-armed form, dark-complexioned like a rain-cloud, holding the conch, discus, mace, and lotus, and which is now made visible by Me.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In the verse 'dṛṣṭvā rūpaṃ mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍhabhāvaḥ' (having seen this form, may there be no distress in you, nor bewilderment), since no specific verb is heard, it might be understood as: 'distress is caused by seeing this form, and consequently let there be no bewilderment.' Even if the verb 'abhūt' (was/happened) is supplied, it might imply that seeing this form is the cause of the absence of distress etc. To prevent this misconception, Sri Ramanuja explains: 'by seeing such a terrible form' etc. By saying 'behold again this very form of Mine', there could be a delusion that He is asking to behold again the form which is the cause of fear etc. Therefore, the word 'tat' (that) is explained differently as 'the gentle form accustomed to before'. Since the words 'tadeva' (that very) and 'idam' (this) might cause a misconception of the simultaneous existence of both forms, the word 'tat' is used in the sense of temporal proximity (the form to be shown immediately after) to dispel this, and the verb 'I show' (darśayāmi) is supplied. Thus, the word 'idam' refers to the form that is currently being displayed.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Since this form cannot be seen by anyone else, therefore, being free from the previously mentioned fear, doubt, etc., behold that very form — thus the Lord says 'ma te' etc. Let there be no distress in you of the nature of 'I will not show you the form' etc. And further, upon seeing this visible, terrible, frightening form of Mine, which is endowed with the attributes of devouring all, let there be no bewilderment of the nature of delusion. Becoming free from fear (vyapetabhih) and gladdened in mind (pritamanah), behold clearly (prapasya) this very form of Mine which was seen by you previously — meaning, behold it with devotion according to your heart's desire.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
With the intention, 'If you are distressed even after seeing this form which is extremely rare to behold, then I shall withdraw it,' the Lord says 'ma te' etc. The sense is: having seen this terrible form of Mine of such nature, let there be no distress in you. Let there be no bewilderment or delusion in you either. Becoming free from fear (fearless) and gladdened in mind, behold again this very form of Mine, which was prayed for by you to be seen.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
You have been perturbed and bewildered by seeing this horrible feature of Mine. Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free again from all disturbances. With a peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.

 In the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā Arjuna was worried about killing Bhīṣma and Droṇa, his worshipful grandfather and master. But Kṛṣṇa said that he need not be afraid of killing his grandfather. When the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra tried to disrobe Draupadī in the assembly of the Kurus, Bhīṣma and Droṇa were silent, and for such negligence of duty they should be killed. Kṛṣṇa showed His universal form to Arjuna just to show him that these people were already killed for their unlawful action. That scene was shown to Arjuna because devotees are always peaceful and they cannot perform such horrible actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universal form was shown; now Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Kṛṣṇa showed him. A devotee is not much interested in the universal form, for it does not enable one to reciprocate loving feelings. Either a devotee wants to offer his respectful worshipful feelings, or he wants to see the two-handed Kṛṣṇa form so that he can reciprocate in loving service with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.