Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
anādimadhyāntamanantavīryam anantabāhuṃ śaśisūryanetram .
paśyāmi tvāṃ dīptahutāśavaktraṃ svatejasā viśvamidaṃ tapantam

Word Meanings:
अनादिमध्यान्तम् - without beginning
अनन्तवीर्यम् - infinite in power
अनन्तबाहुम् - of endless arms
शशिसूर्यनेत्रम् - with the sun and moon as eyes
पश्यामि - see
त्वाम् - Thee
दीप्तहुताशवक्त्रम् - with mouth like blazing fire
स्वतेजसा - with Thy radiance
विश्वम् - the universe
इदम् - this
तपन्तम् - heating.

Life Application:
Perceive the infinite power without beginning, middle, or end, with sun and moon as eyes and blazing fire.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
I see You without beginning, middle, and end, possessed of infinite power, with endless arms, having the sun and the moon as Your eyes, having a mouth like a blazing fire, and heating up this universe with Your own radiance.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
I see Thee without beginning, middle or end, infinite in power, of endless arms, the sun and the moon being Thy eyes, the burning fire Thy mouth, heating the whole universe with Thy radiance.

अनादिमध्यान्तम् without beginning? middle or end? अनन्तवीर्यम् infinite in power? अनन्तबाहुम् of endless arms? शशिसूर्यनेत्रम् Thy eyes as the sun and the moon? पश्यामि (I) see? त्वाम् Thee? दीप्तहुताशवक्त्रम् Thy mouth as the burning fire? स्वतेजसा with Thy radiance? विश्वम् the universe? इदम् this? तपन्तम् heating.Commentary Anantabahu Having endless arms. This denotes that the multiplicity of His limbs are endless.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Without beginning, without middle and without end, infinite in power, Thine arms all-embracing, the sun and moon Thine eyes, Thy face beaming with the fire of sacrifice, flooding the whole universe with light.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Whatever Arjuna’s subtle vision saw and intellect understood, he tries to describe it in the language of the objects of the world. I see You without beginning, end, and middle, endowed with infinite power, and having infinite arms. This word-picture painted by Vyasa’s powerful poetry creates an illusion as if the subject matter of this poem is some visible object of the outer world. Many painters try to depict it on paper with colors. But to a wise student of Vedanta, their ignorance is clearly visible. An infinite entity, which is without beginning, middle, and end, can never be expressed within the limits of a finite canvas. However, hearing the word 'Anantabahu' (infinite arms), inspired painters immediately try to paint it. Actually, the majestic cosmic vision before the poet’s transcendental experience, which is completely different and unique from all the scenes of the world, can in fact only be understood by a serious and discerning student. Here, 'Anantabahu' simply means that the Supreme Self alone is that conscious principle which provides all arms with the necessary capacity to work and achieve success. The same light principle that illumines external objects also graces our eyes, giving them the ability to perceive objects. The description given here is from the standpoint of the totality (Samashti), because in the world we see objects in the light of the sun or the moon, which in the scriptural language of Vedanta are called the eyes of the Cosmic Being (Virat Purusha). Hutashavaktram (having a mouth like blazing fire) - Hutasha means fire. The presiding deity of speech is fire. Therefore, idioms of this kind are famous in all languages, such as 'there was a heated debate', 'that statement of his acted as a spark', etc. Since the mouth is the place of consumption and speech, fire is called the mouth of the Cosmic Being here. Heating the universe with His own radiance, the Self can only be of the nature of Consciousness, because Consciousness always illumines all the experiences of every living being. This Consciousness not only illumines objects, but also provides the warmth necessary for the life of the entire universe through the sun. This statement proves that only after observing and studying the external world did the Hindu sages turn their vision inward. It seems they knew that life on Earth is possible only at a certain temperature; if the temperature is lower or higher than that, life will disappear. This light of Truth is His own essential nature, and not obtained from any other source. This point has been clarified by the word 'Svatejasa' (by one's own radiance). By that alone life is sustained. Arjuna says further:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
I observe You having to beginning, no middle and no end; having infinite creative power, and infinite arms; as havig the moon and the sun for Your eyes, and the blazing fire for Your mouth; [and] as acorching this universe with Your rediance.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
I behold You as without beginning, middle and end. Your might is infinite. You are endowed with an endless number of arms. The sun and moon are Your eyes. Your mouth is emitting burning fire. With Your own radiance You are warning the whole universe.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
I see You as without beginning, middle and end, possessed of infinite valour, having innumerable arms, having the sun and the moon as eyes, having a mouth like a blazing fire, and heating up this Universe by Your own brilliance.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Having the moon and the sun as His eyes' is to be understood in the same way as 'I am the ritual sacrifice' (9.16) etc. In the Rgveda Khilas it is said: 'All the gods are born of His limbs, and therefore they are praised by the sages as His limbs.' And also, 'The moon was born from His mind, and the sun was born from His eyes' (RV 8.4.19.3, YS 31.12). Since He possesses multiple forms, it is appropriate for them to have multiple supports.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He describes again the cosmic form (Vishvarupa) of the Lord, saying 'kincha' (furthermore). 'Hutasha' is fire (vahni), because it consumes (ashnati) what is offered (hutam).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
I see You without beginning, middle and end, of infinite power, of infinite arms, with the moon and the sun as Your eyes, with mouths like blazing fire, and heating the world with Your radiance.

Commentary—
'Anadimadhyantam'—You are without beginning, middle and end; that is, You have no boundary. In the sixteenth verse also Arjuna said, 'I do not see Your beginning, middle and end.' There, spatial infinity was described, and here, temporal infinity is described. The implication is that there is no boundary to You in any way—spatially, temporally, or object-wise. The entire space, time, etc., are within You, so how can You come under space, time, etc.? That is, You cannot be measured on the basis of space, time, etc.
'Anantaviryam'—You possess infinite valour, capability, strength and radiance. You are infinite, boundless, and powerful.
'Anantabahum'—How many arms You have, there can be no count. You possess infinite arms.
'Shashisuryanetram'—The moon and the sun, which illuminate the entire world, are Your eyes. Therefore, the entire world receives light from You alone.
'Diptahutashavaktram'—You alone are the one with a glowing fire-like mouth who accepts whatever is offered into the fire in sacrifices, homas, etc.
'Svatejasa vishvamidam tapantam'—You alone are the one heating the entire universe with Your radiance. The implication is that from whatever individuals, objects, circumstances, etc., adversity is received, all living beings are tormented by those very things. The tormentor and the tormented—both are limbs of the same single Cosmic Form (Virat-rupa).

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
I behold You as without beginning, middle and end. Your might is infinite, of unsurpassed excellence. Here the term 'might' is used for illustration. The meaning is that You are the sole repository of knowledge, strength, sovereignty, valour, power and glory, one whose excellence cannot be surpassed. Your arms are infinite, i.e., they are countless. This is also for illustration, implying that You have an infinite number of arms, stomachs, feet, mouths etc. The sun and moon are Your eyes; all Your eyes are like the moon and the sun, beaming with grace and power. The grace is directed towards the devotees like the gods who offer salutations etc., and power is directed against Asuras, Raksasas etc., who are opposed to these. For it will be said later on:  'The Raksasas flee on all sides in fear, and all the hosts of Siddhas bow down to You' (11.36). Your mouth is emitting fire, namely, the fire appropriate for destroying all things, as the Fire of Time consumes the world at the time of dissolution. With Your own radiance You are warming the universe. By radiance (Tejas) is meant the poweer to vanish others. I behold You warming (or governing) the universe with Your own radiance. The meaning is this:  'I directly realise You' as taught before as the Creator of all, as the supporter of everything, as the sovereign over everything, as the destroyer of everything, as the ocean of knowledge and other infinite attributes, as without beginning, middle and end, and as possessing a divine body of this nature. How, in one divine body, can there be many stomachs etc.?  This is possible in the following way:  From a hip of infinite extent, stomachs etc., as described, branc off upwards. The divine feet etc., branch off downwards. So there is no contradiction in attributing a pair of eyes for each face.

'On perceiving You to be thus, the gods etc., and myself, have become frightened - says Arjuna in the following words:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Pasyami, I see; tvam, You; as anadi-madhya-antam, without beginning, middle and end; ananta-viryam, possessed of infinite valour; and also ananta-bahum, having innumerable arms; sasi-surya-netram, having the sun and the moon as the eyes; dipta-hutasavakram, having a mouth like a blazing fire; tapantam, heating up; idam, this; visvam, Universe; sva-tejasa, by Your own birlliance.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Since it is said 'having the moon and the sun as eyes', how can the term Vishvarupa be interpreted otherwise? To this, he says: 'shashi...' [the moon, etc.]. It should be explained in the same manner. The meaning is that the statement of non-difference is based either on the relationship of generator and generated, or that of the support and the supported. Why is this so? To this, he says: 'tadangajah' [born of His limbs]. 'Tadanga' is an uninflected form or a vocative. He also points out the obstacle to absolute identity: 'chandrama...' [the moon, etc.], 'chakshoh' [from the eye]. Objection: Here, the moon is said to be born of the mind and supported by it, whereas in the Gita it is supported by the eye, and elsewhere it is said 'teeth, sun and moon'. How is there no contradiction? To this, he says: 'bahu...' [because of having many forms].

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Furthermore, 'without beginning, middle and end'. This refers to the divine form as Time (Kala-rupa). Hence, he says 'having the moon and sun as eyes', meaning He whose eyes are the moon and the sun, the presiding deities of Time. Similarly, He in whose mouths is the blazing fire, the presiding deity of evening-time; I behold You as such.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Furthermore—'anadi...'. Without origin (adi), maintenance (madhya), or destruction (anta)—such is 'without beginning, middle, and end'. He whose power (virya) or glory is infinite. He whose arms are infinite. This is illustrative of mouths, etc., as well. He whose eyes are the moon and the sun. He whose mouth is the blazing fire, or in whose mouths it resides. I see You (tvam) heating or scorching (santapayantam) this universe with Your own radiance (tejas).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore—'anadi...'. Without origin, maintenance, and dissolution. He whose power or glory is infinite. He whose arms are infinite. I see You as such, whose eyes are the moon and the sun. And also, He in whose mouths is the blazing fire, heating or scorching this universe with His own radiance; I see You.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He describes the supreme nature of the Lord (paramapurushatvam) in another way, saying 'anadi...'. One who is devoid of beginning, middle and end, of infinite valour or boundless prowess, whose arms are endless, whose eyes are the moon and the sun, and whose mouth is the blazing fire. Therefore, I see You scorching this universe with Your own radiance.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In 'anadimadhyantam', if the negative particle (nan) were interpreted as meaning 'other than that', it would contradict statements like 'I am the beginning, middle, and end of all creations' (10.32) and 'I am the beginning, middle, and end of all beings' (10.20). Therefore, the author indicates its negative sense as 'devoid of beginning, middle, and end'. The phrase 'neither end nor middle' (11.16) refers to the essential nature (svarupa), whereas this verse refers to the physical form (vigraha), so there is no tautology. Alternatively, the negation of modifications like birth, maintenance, and destruction is meant in some places, and the negation of their causes in others, which resolves the repetition. Or, because the form of Time is seen here, the intention is to convey the eternity of the manifestation known as Time, as in 'Lord Time is without beginning' (VP 1.2.26). The infinity of valour (virya) means the absence of any limitation caused by comparison; hence Sri Ramanuja says: 'whose excellence cannot be surpassed'. To show that it is not restricted only to what is mentioned, and that the mention of one of closely associated attributes implies the others as well, Sri Ramanuja says: 'the word virya (might) is illustrative'. In 11.16, 'many arms' (anekabahum) meant only the multiplicity of arms, whereas 'anantabahum' (infinite arms) refers to the absence of any numerical limit. Thus there is no repetition; hence he says: 'innumerable arms'. In the previously mentioned group 'many arms, stomachs, mouths, eyes' (11.16), the declaration of innumerability for one is illustrative of the others as well; hence he says: 'that too is illustrative'.
In 'shashisuryanetram', it is not a figurative superimposition of moon and sun as eyes, since there is no context for such superimposition, and this form has infinite eyes. Therefore, only comparison (sadharmya) is intended. Since there is no divider to say that some eyes are like the moon and others like the sun, all eyes are intended to be like both. Hence Sri Ramanuja says: 'like the moon and the sun'. He resolves the simultaneous existence of the contradictory qualities of grace (prasada) and power (pratapa) by directing them to different subjects: grace to the gods, etc., and power to their opponents. He establishes this using what is said later: 'The Raksasas flee...' (11.36). Although 'having the brilliance of blazing fire and sun' (11.16) was said earlier, the specific mention of 'diptahutashavaktram' (mouths like blazing fire) is for the specific purpose of swallowing the world; hence he says 'like the blazing Fire of Time' and 'appropriate for destruction'. To refute others who interpret it as 'the fire itself is the mouth', he says 'like the Fire of Time' in view of the future verse 'like the Fire of Time' (11.25). Fire is also included in the Vasus, but mentioned separately.
By the phrase 'heating this universe', the word 'tejas' (radiance) does not mean independence from others, as it is irrelevant here; therefore, he gives the appropriate meaning: 'of radiance'. This indicates the cause behind statements like 'Time cooks all beings', which is why he says 'with His own'. Summing up all the aspects heard before and subsequently realized through the divine eye, he says 'thus'. He raises the query: 'how can there be many stomachs, etc. in one body, when the association of one body with many arms and mouths was previously heard and seen, but many stomachs were not?' and resolves it by saying 'in this way', meaning everything that is heard must be explained.
The explanation starting with 'From one...' implies: from the words 'having many arms, stomachs, mouths, eyes', only the multiplicity of limbs is stated, showing the form is one, which is also confirmed by the context of a single body. It cannot be argued that because of the introduction 'Behold, O Partha, My forms' (11.5), this refers to multiple bodies with multiple stomachs; for if that were so, it would have been sufficient to say 'multiple bodies'. Multiple arms, stomachs, etc., are not specifically desired in separate bodies. Nor can it be said that a form with multiple stomachs, etc. is not seen in the Vaishnava scriptures (Pancharatra), because that scripture is not fully available now; we do not see even the forms seen by Narada etc. now. Sri Vishvarupa was seen differently by Narada, and differently by Dhritarashtra. Therefore, just as Varaha, Narasimha, etc. show variations in posture, color, arms, etc. according to different Samhitas, we accept similar variations in the form of Sri Vishvarupa solely based on scriptural authority. Thus, just as a tree is one despite the multiplicity of branches and roots because the trunk is one, the form here is one despite the multiplicity of arms, stomachs, etc., because the hip region is one without any division. All this is indicated by the term 'as described'. 'Two eyes in one face' means in each and every face.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Having thus described the Supreme Person (Purushottama), he describes the Cosmic Form (Vishvarupa) as seen by him, starting with 'anadi...'. One who has no beginning (adi), middle (madhya), and end (anta), meaning free from origin, maintenance, and dissolution. One whose valour or prowess (virya) is infinite. One whose arms are endless, meaning whose power of action (kriya-shaktayah) is infinite. One whose eyes are the moon and the sun. One whose mouths contain the blazing, smoke-free fire (hutasha or agni). I see You (tvam) endowed with radiance, heating this visible universe with Your own radiance.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He explains this very thing, saying 'anadi...'. Devoid of beginning, middle and end in terms of both space (deshatah) and time (kalatah), hence 'without beginning, middle and end'. By 'whose mouth is the blazing fire', the brilliance of His teeth is suggested. 'By Your own radiance' means by the light of Consciousness (chaitanya-jyotisha). 'Heating this universe' means illuminating this cosmic form (vishvarupam). I see and know You, who are of the nature of Supreme Light (paramajyotirupam), heating (or illuminating) the universe which is the object of the act of heating/illuminating, and which is qualified by all these adjectives like beginninglessness, etc. The inner meaning is: 'I realize that You are that very Light by which the Cosmic Form, which is like a painted canvas and endowed with the mental impressions of all active agents, is illuminated.'

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
You are without origin, middle or end. Your glory is unlimited. You have numberless arms, and the sun and moon are Your eyes. I see You with blazing fire coming forth from Your mouth, burning this entire universe by Your own radiance.

 There is no limit to the extent of the six opulences of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here and in many other places there is repetition, but according to the scriptures, repetition of the glories of Kṛṣṇa is not a literary weakness. It is said that at a time of bewilderment or wonder or of great ecstasy, statements are repeated over and over. That is not a flaw.