Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sarvasya cāhaṃ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtirjñānamapohanañca .
vedaiśca sarvairahameva vedyo vedāntakṛdvedavideva cāham

Word Meanings:
सर्वस्य - of all
च - and
अहम् - I
हृदि - in the heart
सन्निविष्टः - seated
मत्तः - from Me
स्मृतिः - memory
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
अपोहनम् - absence
च - and
वेदैः - by the Vedas
च - and
सर्वैः - all
अहम् - I
एव - even
वेद्यः - to be known
वेदान्तकृत् - author of the Vedanta
वेदवित् - the knower of Vedas
एव - even
च - and
अहम् - I

Life Application:
Seated in the heart of all, from God comes memory, knowledge, and their loss; God is to be known by all scriptures.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
And I am seated in the hearts of all; from Me are memory and knowledge, as well as their absence. I am verily That which has to be known by all the Vedas; I am indeed the author of the Vedanta and the knower of the Vedas am I.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
And I am seated in the hearts of all; from Me are memory and knowledge, as well as their absence. I am verily That which has to be known by all the Vedas; I am indeed the author of the Vedanta and the knower of the Vedas am I.

सर्वस्य of all? च and? अहम् I? हृदि in the heart? सन्निविष्टः seated? मत्तः from Me? स्मृतिः memory? ज्ञानम् knowledge? अपोहनम् (their) absence? च and? वेदैः by the Vedas? च and? सर्वैः (by) all? अहम् I? एव even? वेद्यः to be known? वेदान्तकृत् the author of the Vedanta? वेदवित् the knower of Vedas? एव even? च and? अहम् I.Commentary I am seated in the hearts of all sentient beings as their innermost Self. Therefore from Me? the Self of all beings? are memory? knowledge and their loss. Righteous persons have knowledge and memory as a result of virtuous deeds. Sinful persons have loss of memory and knowledge as a result of vicious deeds. Virtue promotes peace and hence intellectual powers.Apohanam Loss (destruction or absence) of memory and knowledge? as also of the reasoning faculty. The loss of memory and knowledge is due to lust? anger? grief and delusion.Smriti Memory. It is a special modification of the mind (Antahkarana Vritti) born of the Samskaras that causes the revival of the past experiences or enjoyments of sensual objects of this life in a worldy man who has not practised Yoga. A Yogi gets revival of experiences of his past lives and transcendental knowledge that is beyond time? space and causation and visible nature.I am the central topic of the Vedas. To understand the Vedas is to Know Me. I? the Supreme Being? am to be known in all the Vedas. It is I Who know the Vedic teaching or the meaning of the Vedas. I cause the teaching of the Vedanta to be handed down in regular succession. I am the author of what is beyond the Vedas? viz.? the Upanishads that constitute the Vedanta? that deal with the transcendental Supreme Being beyond all names and forms and devoid of all alities.A brief description of the glories of the Lord Narayana as manifested through special vehicles has been given in the above four verses. From the next verse a description of the form of Purushottama Who is free from any limiting adjunct is given. (Cf.X.20)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
I am enthroned in the hearts of all; memory, wisdom and discrimination owe their origins to Me. I am He Who is to be realised in the scriptures; I inspire their wisdom and I know their truth.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
And I am seated in the hearts of all; from Me are memory and knowledge, as well as their absence. I am verily That which has to be known by all the Vedas; I am indeed the author of the Vedanta and the knower of the Vedas am I.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that 'heart' in philosophy does not mean the physical organ, but the calm, pure, and integrated mind capable of higher realization. The Self is seated as the inner light of Consciousness in everyone. Memory (Smriti), knowledge (Jnana), and their loss (Apohana) all depend on the light of Consciousness. The Lord states that He is the sole object of knowledge in all the scriptures, and He is both the author of the Vedanta (the Upanishads, which reveal the ultimate truth) and the true knower of the Vedas. This verse synthesizes the entire teaching of the cosmos as an expression of the one Divine Reality.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
I am entered (the Self-conciousness is felt) in the heart of all; from Me (this Self-consciousness) come the faculty of memory, the faculty of  knowing, and also the faculty of differentiating; none but Me is to be known by means of all the Vedas and I am alone the author of the final part of the Vedas and also the author of the Vedas themselves.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
And I am seated in the hearts of all. From Me are memory, knowledge and their removal also. Indeed I alone am to be known from all the Vedas. I bring about the fruition of the rituals of Vedas; I alone am the knower of the Vedas.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And I am seated in the hearts of all. From Me are memory, knowledge and their loss. I alone am the object to be known through all the Vedas; I am also the originator of the Vedanta, and I Myself am the knower of the Vedas.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that 'Vedanta-krt' means the Lord is the author of the system of resolution of the Vedic teachings (Mimamsa). He is the creator of time and the ultimate knower of the scriptures.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that memory and knowledge in creatures are governed by the Lord as the inner director. Righteous souls receive memory and knowledge according to their virtuous actions, while the sinful experience their loss.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
And I am seated in the hearts of all; from Me are memory and knowledge, as well as their absence. I am verily That which has to be known by all the Vedas; I am indeed the author of the Vedanta and the knower of the Vedas am I.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas emphasizes that the Lord resides in the heart of every being, making Him extremely close and accessible to all, regardless of their past deeds, caste, or intellect. Righteous souls gain memory and wisdom by His grace, whereas evil actions lead to the loss of discrimination (Apohana). The Lord clarifies that He is the sole subject to be known across all the Vedas, rather than temporary worldly pleasures. As the source from which the Vedas originated, He is both the ultimate decider of their philosophy (Vedantakrt) and the only true knower of their essence.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Controlling everything by My will, I exist as 'the self in their hearts', namely, in the place from which springs knowledge, the root of activity and inactivity of all beings as also of the Soma and digestive fire. So the Srutis declare in the following texts:  'Entering within, He is the ruler of all things and the Self of all' (Tai. A., 3.11), 'He who, dwelling in the earth ৷৷. He who, dwelling in the self, is within the self ৷৷. who controls the earth' (Br. U. Madh., 3.7. 3. 22); 'The heart which is comparable to an inverted lotus-bud' (Ma. Na., 11.7); and 'Now, here, in the city of brahman, is an abode, a small lotus-flower' (Cha. U., 8.1.1). The Smrtis also declare thus:  'Visnu is the ruler of the whole universe, who permeates the universe' (V. P., 1.17. 20), 'He is the ruler of all, who is minutely small among those who are minutely small (Manu., 12.122); and 'He is the controller, the judge, the King, who is seated in your heart' (Ibid., 8.92).

Therefore, the memory of all beings springs from Me alone. 'Memory' is knowledge springing from experience and its subtle impressions. They have for their contents past experiences. 'Knowledge' is determination of a thing through the senses, inference, the scriptures and intuitive meditation. This is also from Me. So does 'Apohana' too. 'Apohana' signifies the cessation of knowledge. 'Apohana' may also mean 'Uhana' (conjectural knowledge). Uhana is 'Uha' (conjecture). 'Uha' is that knowledge which is accessory to the actual means of knowledge (Pramana). It is done by determining whether that means of knowledge can be operative with reference to the particular subject-matter on hand, through the examination of the instruments of that means of knowledge (Pramana). This 'Uha' also comes from Me.

Indeed 'I am to be known from all the Vedas,' for I am the inner ruler of Agni, Surya, Soma, Vayu, Sun and Indra and other divinities as their self. The Vedas are intent on speaking of them (i.e., the divinities). 'I am to be known from all the Vedas; for, terms like gods, men etc., signify the individual selves in them. I bring about the fruition of the Veda. 'Vedanta', here means the end, namely, the fruition, of Vedic injunctions like 'Let sacrifice be made to Indra' and 'Let sacrifice be made to Varuna.' For, all Vedas find their consummation in fruition. 'Antakrt' means grantor of fruits. The meaning is:  'I alone am the grantor of the fruition described in the Vedas.' This has been already declared in the verses beginning from, 'Whichever devotee seeks to worship with faith whatever form' and ending with, 'From that faith he gets the objects of his desire, granted in reality by Me alone' (7.21 - 22); and also 'I am the enjoyer and the only Lord of all sacrifices' (9.24). I am the knower of the Vedas; I know the Veda that speaks about Me. The sense is that he who speaks of the meaning of the Vedas as otherwise than this import, is not the knower of the Vedas.

Therefore, listen from Me alone the meaning or the essene of the Vedas.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Having become the fire Vaisvanara, I abide in the body of living beings and, associated with the Prana and the Apana, digest the fourfold food.

Commentary: Sri Abhinavagupta points out that the Lord's power of sustaining the world operates through the elements. The fire of Vaisvanara digests the fourfold food fanned by Prana and Apana, meaning the entire metabolic warmth in creatures is a manifestation of the Supreme Self.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And aham, I, as the Self; san-nivistah, am seated; hrdi, in the hearts, in the intellects; sarvasya, of all creatures. Therefore, with regard to all the creatures, mattah, from Me, from the Self; are Smrtih, memory; jnanam, knowledge; and their apohanam, loss.
The knowledge and memory of these creatures who perform good deeds come from Me in accordance with the good deeds; similarly, the loss, deterioration, of memory and knowledge of those who perform evil deeds comes from Me in accordance with the evil deeds.
Aham eva, I alone, the supreme Self; am the vedyah, object to be known; sarvaih, through all; vedaih, the Vedas. I am also the vedanta-krt, the originator of the Vedanta, i.e., the source of the traditional school of the teachings of Vedanta; and aham eva, I Myself; am the veda-vit, knower of the Vedas, the knower of the teachings of the Vedas.
In the verses beginning with, 'That light in the sun which৷৷.' (12), etc. have been stated briefly the majesty of God, the Lord called Naravana, which arise from special limiting adjuncts. Now then, the succeeding verses are begun with a view to determining the real nature of that very Lord as the Unconditioned and Absolute, by distinguishing Him from the limiting adjuncts, (viz) the mutable and the immutable. In that connection, after dividing into three parts [The two limiting adjuncts-the mutable and the immutable-, and the supreme Self.] all the teachings of the preceding and the immediately succeeding chapters, the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha comments that the Lord's form as Vedanta-krt refers to Him being the author of the Brahma-Sutras and the school of logic that resolves the meaning of the Vedas. Thus, He is the supreme authority on Vedic truth.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that the Lord residing in the heart regulates the memory, knowledge, and confusion of all souls according to their karma. He is the author and interpreter of the Vedas, showing that all scriptures point to Him alone.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that memory of past births for yogis, sensory knowledge, and their loss due to passions like anger are all governed by the Lord. As the creator of Vedanta (in the form of Vyasa), He is the sole knower of the scriptures.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the Lord enters the hearts of all as the inner controller (Antaryamin). He is the source of memory, sensory knowledge, and their absence. He is the spiritual master (Guru) who initiates the lineage of Vedanta.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that the Lord enters the hearts of all creatures from Brahma down to a blade of grass. By witnessing their virtues and vices, He dispenses memory, knowledge, and their loss. All scriptures, including Puranas, describe Him alone.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha discusses that the Lord residing in the heart is the master of all activities. Memory, wisdom, and discrimination (Uhana) are given by Him. He is the grantor of the fruits of sacrifices and the ultimate knower of the Vedas.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that the Lord's presence in the heart guides the cognitive faculties of Jivas. By providing them memory and knowledge, He helps them perform their duties and attain liberation through Vedic wisdom.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the cognitive processes of memory and knowledge are not purely physical but are powered by the Lord's light of consciousness. He is the author of Vedanta, which resolves the apparent contradictions of the Vedas.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
I am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas, I am to be known. Indeed, I am the compiler of Vedānta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.

 The Supreme Lord is situated as Paramātmā in everyone’s heart, and it is from Him that all activities are initiated. The living entity forgets everything of his past life, but he has to act according to the direction of the Supreme Lord, who is witness to all his work. Therefore he begins his work according to his past deeds. Required knowledge is supplied to him, and remembrance is given to him, and he forgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart. He awards the different fruitive results. He is worshipable not only as the impersonal Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the localized Paramātmā, but as the form of the incarnation of the Vedas as well. The Vedas give the right direction to people so that they can properly mold their lives and come back to Godhead, back to home. The Vedas offer knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa in His incarnation as Vyāsadeva is the compiler of the Vedānta-sūtra. The commentation on the Vedānta-sūtra by Vyāsadeva in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam gives the real understanding of Vedānta-sūtra. The Supreme Lord is so full that for the deliverance of the conditioned soul He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of his activity, and the giver of knowledge in the form of the Vedas and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the teacher of the Bhagavad-gītā . He is worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good; God is all-merciful. Antaḥ-praviṣṭaḥ śāstā janānām. The living entity forgets as soon as he quits his present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by the Supreme Lord. Although he forgets, the Lord gives him the intelligence to renew his work where he ended his last life. So not only does a living entity enjoy or suffer in this world according to the dictation from the Supreme Lord situated locally in the heart, but he receives the opportunity to understand the Vedas from Him. If one is serious about understanding the Vedic knowledge, then Kṛṣṇa gives the required intelligence. Why does He present the Vedic knowledge for understanding? Because a living entity individually needs to understand Kṛṣṇa. Vedic literature confirms this: yo ’sau sarvair vedair gīyate. In all Vedic literature, beginning from the four Vedas, Vedānta-sūtra and the Upaniṣads and Purāṇas, the glories of the Supreme Lord are celebrated. By performance of Vedic rituals, discussion of the Vedic philosophy and worship of the Lord in devotional service, He is attained. Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Kṛṣṇa. The Vedas give us direction by which to understand Kṛṣṇa and the process of realizing Him. The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vedānta-sūtra (1.1.4) confirms this in the following words: tat tu samanvayāt. One can attain perfection in three stages. By understanding Vedic literature one can understand his relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by performing the different processes one can approach Him, and at the end one can attain the supreme goal, who is no other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse the purpose of the Vedas, the understanding of the Vedas, and the goal of the Vedas are clearly defined.