Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
divyamālyāmbaradharaṃ divyagandhānulepanam .
sarvāścaryamayaṃ devamanantaṃ viśvatomukham

Word Meanings:
दिव्यमाल्याम्बरधरम् - wearing divine garlands and
दिव्यगन्धानुलेपनम् - anointed with divine perfumes
सर्वाश्चर्यमयम् - the allwonderful
देवम् - resplendent
अनन्तम् - endless
विश्वतोमुखम् - with faces on all

Life Application:
Sense the divine presence wearing heavenly garlands, garments, and ointments, all-wonderful, resplendent, and boundless.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
(Arjuna saw the) Supreme God, wearing divine garlands and apparel, anointed with divine perfumes, full of all wonders, infinite, and facing all directions (the cosmic form).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Wearing divine garlands (necklaces) and apparel, anointed with divine unguents, the all-wonderful, resplendent (Being) endless with faces on all sides.

दिव्यमाल्याम्बरधरम् wearing divine garlands (necklaces) and apparel? दिव्यगन्धानुलेपनम् anointed with divine unguents? सर्वाश्चर्यमयम् the allwonderful? देवम् resplendent? अनन्तम् endless? विश्वतोमुखम् with faces on all sides.Commentary Visvatomukham With faces on all sides? as He is the Self of all beings.Devam God. Also means resplendent.Anantam Endless. He Who is free from the three kinds of limitations? viz.? DesaKalaVastuPariccheda (limitations of space? time? and thing respectively) is Anantam. He is Brahman. This philosophical concept is explained below.The pot is here. This is spacelimitatio. The pot is now here. This is timelimitation. The pot is not a cloth. This is thing(material) limitation. There is saffron in Kashmir only. This is limitation of space and thing. You can have apples only in September. This is limitation of time and thing. But Brahman is everywhere? as It is allpervading. It exists in the past? the present and the future. It dwells in all parts. Hence It is beyond these three limitations. It is therefore endless.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Crowned with heavenly garlands, clothed in shining garments, anointed with divine unctions, He showed Himself as the Resplendent One, Marvellous, Boundless, Omnipresent.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
When an artist tries to express his artistic thought through colours, he initially draws a vague outline of his subject on a canvas. Thereafter, inch by inch, he fills in the colours to make the picture clearer and clearer. Ultimately, the painting seems to sing the song of the artist's message. Similarly, this verse of the word-picture painted by Vyasa Ji, the skilled artist of literature, draws the outline of the Lord's Cosmic Form in the words of Sanjaya. The vision that appeared before Sanjaya can by no means be said to be easily graspable by a man of ordinary intellect. Seeing this glorious and powerful vision, an ordinary man would be left dumbfounded with fear and wonder. The entire universe is not a subject that can be imagined by the mind, nor can the intellect grasp it. Therefore, when this scene appears in the midst of the Gita's discourse, even Sanjaya begins to falter slightly while describing it. Wearing divine garlands and garments, anointed with divine perfume, all-wonderful, facing all directions - these words are symbols of those curved strokes of the artist, by which the picture of the Cosmic Form is completed in its outline. Sanjaya describes further:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
That wears heavenly garlands and garments; has the unguent of heavenly sandal paste;  it is all wonderful, shining (or godly), infinite; and it has faces in all directions.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Wearing celestial garlands and raiments, anointed with divine perfumes, full of all wonders, resplendent, boundless and facing all directions.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Wearing heavenly garlands and apparel, anointed with heavenly scents, abounding in all kinds of wonder, resplendent, infinite, and with faces everywhere.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Sarva-ascaryamayam' means embodying all wonders.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He qualifies the Lord, who possesses the aforementioned form, in another way: 'Kinca' (furthermore) etc. Even if 'Arjuna' is supplied (as 'Arjuna saw'), the syntactical connection of the words is possible.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The Lord showed His divine form which has many mouths and eyes, many wonderful sights, many divine ornaments, many divine weapons raised in hands, wearing divine garlands, clad in divine garments, and anointed with divine sandal paste, saffron etc. - a Lord who is all-wonderful, of infinite forms, and facing all directions.

Commentary:
'Aneka-vaktra-nayanam' - All the mouths and eyes seen in the Cosmic Form manifested by the Lord are divine. All the limbs, such as mouths, eyes, hands, feet, etc., of all the living beings seen in the Cosmic Form belong to the Cosmic Form of the Lord. The reason is that the Lord Himself has manifested as the Cosmic Form.
'Aneka-adbhuta-darsanam' - Whatever forms, shapes, colours, and wonderful designs are seen in the Cosmic Form of the Lord, they all appear wonderful.
'Aneka-divya-abharanam' - All the ornaments worn on the hands, feet, ears, noses, and necks of the many forms seen in the Cosmic Form are divine. The reason is that the Lord Himself has manifested in the form of ornaments.
'Divya-aneka-udyata-ayudham' - The various weapons (arms) like the discus, mace, bow, arrow, iron club, etc., raised by the Lord of the Cosmic Form in His hands, are all divine.
'Divya-malya-ambara-dharam' - The Lord of the Cosmic Form wears various kinds of garlands around His necks, made of flowers, gold, silver, pearls, gems, gunjas, etc. They are all divine. He wears garments of red, yellow, green, white, brown, and other colours on His bodies, all of which are divine.
'Divya-gandha-anulepanam' - All the marks of perfumes like musk, sandalwood, saffron, etc., applied on the forehead and all the ointments applied on the body of the Cosmic Form of the Lord are divine.
'Sarva-ascaryamayam devam-anantam visvatomukham' - In this way, the Lord showed Arjuna His supreme, glorious form which astounds the viewer, is infinite, and has faces on all sides.
For example, if a person sitting far away contemplates in his mind that he is in Haridwar and bathing in the Ganga, then at that time he begins to see the Ganga, the bridge, the men and women standing on the bank, and also feels that he is bathing in the Ganga. In reality, neither Haridwar nor the Ganga is there, but his mind itself appears to him in all those forms. Similarly, the one Lord Himself has manifested in many forms, in the form of ornaments worn on those forms, in the form of various kinds of weapons, in the form of various kinds of garlands, and in the form of various kinds of garments. Therefore, everything in the Cosmic Form of the Lord is divine.
It is mentioned in the Srimad Bhagavatam that when Brahmaji stole the calves and cowherd boys, Lord Krishna Himself became the calves and cowherd boys. Not only the calves and cowherd boys, but He Himself also became their canes, horns, flutes, clothes, ornaments, etc. (Srimad Bhagavatam 10.13.19).
Relationship - Now Sanjaya describes the light of the Cosmic Form.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Divyam' means resplendent. 'Anantam' (boundless) means that form is not limited by time and space because of its being the foundation of the entire universe in the past, present and future. 'Visvatomukham' means facing in all directions. This form is adorned with divine raiments, perfumes, garlands, ornaments and weapons appropriate to it.

He explains the same resplendence expressed by the term 'Divyam':

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Divya-malya-ambara-dharam, wearing heavenly garlands and apparel-the God wearing celestial flowers and clothings; divya-gandha-anulepanam, anointed with heavenly scents; sarva-ascaryamayam, abounding in all kinds of wonder; devam, resplendent; anantam, infinite, boundless; and visvato-mukham, with faces everywhere-He being the Self of all beings. 'He showed (to Arjuna)', or 'Arjuna saw', is to be supplied.
An illustration is once more being given of the effulgence of the Cosmic form of the Lord:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
'Sarva-ascaryamayam' - here some commentator has explained the suffix 'mayat' in the sense of abundance (pracurya). That is incorrect, because the meaning is already covered by the word 'sarva'. Keeping this in mind, (Sri Madhvacharya) said: 'sarva...' The proof for the suffix 'mayat' meaning identity (tadatmya) has already been mentioned.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Listen to what that form was like - the adjectives describing the form start from 'aneka-vaktra-nayanam' up to 'visvato-mukham'. This form is shown like the form of Mahakala-purusha, is to be worshipped by those devoted to the path of Maryada (Maryada-marga), has hands and feet everywhere, is extraordinary, is the embodiment of the collective cosmic Being (Samashti-bhuta-Purusha), is immutable (Kutastha), is the cause of all causes, and is to be understood as being attribute-free (nirguna). The word 'divya' (divine) has an obvious meaning. The garments (ambara) are of the form of Chandomaya (Vedic illusion), the crown and other ornaments are of the form of Parameshthi (Brahma) etc., and the weapons are of the form of the five elements and principles - such a Cosmic Form, facing all directions and of incomparable splendor, was shown by Himself.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Divya...' - 'divya-malya-ambara-dharam' means He by whom divine garlands (made of flowers and gems) and divine garments are worn. 'Divya-gandha-anulepanam' means He whose ointment is of divine scent. 'Sarva-ascaryamayam' means abounding in many wonders. 'Devam' means of the nature of effulgence (light). 'Anantam' means unlimited (infinite). 'Visvato-mukham' means that form in which there are faces in all directions. This is connected with the previous verb 'He showed'; or 'Arjuna saw' is to be supplied.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore - 'Divya...' - wearing divine garlands and garments; having an ointment of divine scent; consisting of many wonders; resplendent (effulgent); boundless (infinite); having faces everywhere.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He describes the Lord who has the aforementioned form. He showed the Lord by whom divine flowers and garments are worn, whose ointment is of divine scent, who is filled with all wonders, who is resplendent, who is infinite, and who has faces everywhere because of being the Self of all beings; or 'Arjuna saw' is to be supplied. Here, although these appear to be adjectives of the form, yet, keeping in mind that the word 'Deva' meaning Ishvara is the main noun (qualificand), the Acharya (Sri Shankaracharya) has explained it in this way.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The multiplicity in garments, ornaments, and weapons is to be understood also from the variety of their kinds. Indeed, the association of many mouths of various types is read in the sacred scriptures regarding the meditation on the Cosmic Form (Shri Vishvarupa); otherwise, the mention of multiplicity of eyes (aneka-nayanatva) would be redundant, since that is already accomplished by the multiplicity of mouths. 'Aneka-adbhuta-darsanam' means that which has many wonderful aspects, i.e., it is seen as possessing boundless, unsurpassed wonder. 'Divyatva' (divinity) means being extraordinary (non-material). 'Sarva-ascaryamayam' means being the locus/support of all principles (tattvas) that are of the nature of wonder. Therefore, there is no tautology with 'aneka-adbhuta-darsanam'. One should contemplate in this regard passages such as: 'Whose form is this great wonder, the universe, of the high-souled Lord' [Vishnu Purana 5.19.7] etc. The word 'dyotamanam' (resplendent) is used (in the commentary) to discard the useless sense of a mere class-distinction for the word 'Deva' here, and to show that it refers specifically to the divine form (vigraha). He (Sri Ramanuja) explains the mode of infinity (anantya) and its cause by the words 'nikhila...' etc. Since being the support of the entire universe is explicitly stated, being the support of all that exists in the three periods of time (past, present, future) is also implied. The consequence of both is the non-limitation by space and time, here either through the body (form) or directly, as the case may be. Infinity, however, belongs to the essential nature (svarupa). Since it stands among the adjectives of the divine form, the word 'ananta' (infinite) also refers to the form. In verse 11.20 ('drstva adbhutam...'), it will say 'of infinite length and breadth, wonderful and terrible', referring indeed to the form. Others hold that the purport is in showing merely the extreme extension. In this way, the future statement 'anantayama-vistare' should be interpreted as a restatement of this. Even though this form is all-pervading, its non-obstruction everywhere is appropriate due to its special power. Even for yogis who possess the eight-fold lordships (siddhis), a special siddhi of 'emerging and merging in the earth' is described. Therefore, the support of the entire universe, including Prakriti etc., which is to be spoken of later, is not illogical. For this reason, it should not be doubted that the support of all is mentioned here in the form of weapons and ornaments, because in the passage 'devadevasya sariram' [11.13], the infinite length and breadth is appropriate as an adjective of the body. Nor should it be said that the inclusion of everything is shown within a very small form by the power of making the impossible possible (aghatita-ghatana-shakti) or as a subtle form like the Lord lying on a banyan leaf, because that is not stated, and indeed the opposite is declared. Therefore, the literal meaning is the correct one. And this has been established in the introductory commentary itself by the word 'acintya' (inconceivable). With the intention that what was said as 'aneka-vaktra...' is qualified here by the word 'visvatomukham', he (Sri Ramanuja) says: 'having faces in all directions of the universe'. Since it directly refers to the form, here the power of having a mouth everywhere is not intended as in passages like 'with eyes everywhere and mouth everywhere...' [Rigveda 4.7.27.1 / Shvetashvatara Upanishad 3.3 / Yajurveda 17.19]. The view of others (Sri Shankaracharya) that it means 'possessing mouths everywhere' is improper, because there are no mouths on hands, feet, etc. This is the idea. Disregarding the order of the text, 'devam' etc. were explained first, in the order of going from indistinct to distinct perception. Indeed, the perception of the distinction of separate objects (garments, etc.) comes after the perception of the form's own shape, and it is proper to show it in that manner; with this intention, although garments (ambara) etc. are mentioned first in the verse, they are shown later (in the commentary) by the words 'svocita...' (appropriate to it). Here too, the description in the order of garments (ambara) etc., bypassing the order of the text, is to show the gradation of internal and external. Here, it is connected with the previous word 'He showed'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Wearing divine garlands and garments suited for divine play (sport/lila); anointed with divine perfume arising from divine play; 'Sarva-ascaryamayam' means inconceivable (beyond logical reasoning); 'Devam' means worshipped by all; 'Anantam' means unlimited and all-pervading; 'Visvato-mukham' means seeing all and facing all.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Visvato-mukham' - this is a reference to the previously stated 'ekatvena prthaktvena bahudha visvatomukham' (9.15). 'Anantam' means free from limitation in all aspects.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
He wore celestial garlands and garments, and many divine scents were smeared over His body. All was wondrous, brilliant, unlimited, and all-expanding.

 In these two verses the repeated use of the word many indicates that there was no limit to the number of hands, mouths, legs and other manifestations Arjuna was seeing. These manifestations were distributed throughout the universe, but by the grace of the Lord, Arjuna could see them while sitting in one place. That was due to the inconceivable potency of Kṛṣṇa.