Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śrībhagavānuvāca .
abhayaṃ sattvasaṃśuddhirjñānayogavyavasthitiḥ .
dānaṃ damaśca yajñaśca svādhyāyastapa ārjavam

Word Meanings:
अभयम् - fearlessness
सत्त्वसंशुद्धिः - purity of heart
ज्ञानयोगव्यवस्थितिः - steadfastness in knowledge and
दानम् - charity
दमः - control of the senses
च - and
यज्ञः - sacrifice
च - and
स्वाध्यायः - study of Sastras
तपः - austerity
आर्जवम् - straightforwardness.

Life Application:
Cultivate fearlessness, purity of heart, steadfastness in knowledge, charity, self-control, sacrifice, study, austerity, honesty.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purity of heart, steadfastness in knowledge and yoga, charity, control of the senses, sacrifice, study of the scriptures, austerity, and straightforwardness.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Blessed Lord said  Fearlessness, purity of heart, steadfastness in knowledge and Yoga, almsgiving, control of the senses, sacrifice, study of scriptures, austerity and straightforwardness.

अभयम् fearlessness? सत्त्वसंशुद्धिः purity of heart? ज्ञानयोगव्यवस्थितिः steadfastness in knowledge and Yoga? दानम् atmsgiving? दमः control of the senses? च and? यज्ञः sacrifice? च and? स्वाध्यायः study of Sastras? तपः austerity? आर्जवम् straightforwardness.Commentary The Lord made a mention of the three kinds of Nature that belong to sentient beings? viz.? the nature of the gods? Asuras and Rakshasas? in the ninth discourse (verses 12 and 13). He now describes them in detail in this discourse. The distinction between the god or the godman and the Asuras is clearly drawn in the first? second? third and fourth verses. Daivi Prakriti or the nature of the gods leads to Moksha or release from the round of birth and death. The nature of the Asuras and Rakshasas leads to bondage. This is an obstacle to the attainment of knowledge of the Self. The divine nature must be accepted and cultivated the Asuric and Rakshasic nature should be abandoned. All these alities are found in human beings. There are Sattvic people who possess the divine attributes there are Asuras and Rakshasas among human beings also? who are endowed with demoniacal alities? who are filled with excessive Tamas. In an ordinary man there is a mixture of the three Gunas. Tamas and Rajas pull a man downwards Sattva lifts a man upwards. Tamas and Rajas lead to bondage Sattva helps to attain salvation. Discipline yourself and develop Sattva This is the foundation of Yoga. This is the first preparatory discipline. The first rung in the spiritual ladder is reached by developing Sattva. When the mind is Sattvic? thee is calmness in it. Divine light can descend only when the mind is serene and cheerful.The Sattvic man controls the senses? does selfless service? and practises Japa? Pranayama? concentration? meditation? selfanalysis and eniry of Who am I He is not attracted by sensual objects. He has a burning desire for attaining Moksha. He is humble? generous? merciful? forbearing? tolerant and pious. He destroys his little personality. The Rajasic man is proud? intolearnt? egoistic? selfsufficient? lustful? hottermpered? greedy and jealous. He works for his own glory and fame and selfaggrandisement. he develops his own little vain personality.There is intimate connection between the Gunas and Karmas. The nature of the Karmas depends upon the nature of the Gunas. A Sattvic man will do virtuous actions. A Rajasic and Tamasic man will perform evil actions. It is the Guna that goads a man to do actions. The Self or Brahman is actionless. It is the silent witness.The Lord sums up in the first three verses the alities of a godly man who is inclined to the path of liberation. He then enumerates the alities of the demoniacal man. The theme of this chapter is the tracing of the difference between the divine and the Asuric nature.Virtue and vice are relative terms. The virtue of one period will become the vice of the other. From the transcendental point of view? there is neither virtue nor vice.Why should there be evil How did evil arise -- these are all transcendental estions (Atiprasnas). You can get answers to these estions only when you attain Selfrealisation. People unnecessarily rack their brains to get an answer to these estions. It is a serious mistake.Daivi Sampat (divine wealth or the wealth of divine alities) helps the aspirant to attain knowledge of the Self. The Sattvic or divine attributes such as fearlessness? purity of heart? control of the senses? etc.? constitute Daivi Sampat. They enable the aspirant to attain the highest state of superconsciousness (Nirvikalpa Samadhi) wherein the seer and the seen are united in one? the meditator and the meditated become identical. Divine alities or attributes which go to augment the bliss of the Self? which help the aspirant to attain the happiness of the Self? are called divine,wealth.Among the divine alities? fearlessness stands foremost. Fear is an effect of ignorance. Identification with the body causes fear. Blind attachment to the body? wife? children? house or property is the cause of fear. The sge who has realised the Self is absolutely fearless.He who knows the Bliss of Brahman from which words as well as the mind turn powerless? fears nothing. (Taittiriya Upanishad)Fearlessness is the devout observance of the precepts enjoined in the scriptures without doubting. The state of being free from the fear? How can I live now when I have renounced everything? when I have none to support me is fearlessness. A Sannyasi resolves when he takes Sannyasa? I will not induce fear in any living creature. Keeping up this resolve of Abhaya Dana (gift of the boon of fearlessness to all creatures) in thought? word and deed is Abhayam or fearlessness. Fear can be removed by constant thinking of the immortal and allblissful nature of the Self. If you lead a life of honesty and truthfulness? if you devoutly observe the precepts of the scriptures without doubting? if you lead a life of right conduct? and if you remember God always? you will become fearless. When one beholds the Self only everywhere? when the sense of duality has vanished? when the sense of unity has dawned in him? how can he be afraid of anything? how can the feeling of fear arise in him Fearlessness is essential for the attainment of Moksha or salvation. Fearlessness is the chief characteristic of a liberated sage. It is the one accurate measure of ones spiritual progress. It is the cardinal virtue of an illumined sage. That is the reason why it is placed in the forefront of all divine alities. Only a liberated sage can be absolutely fearless.Sattvic Subha Vasana (good tendency) is Daivi Sampat. It induces a man to practise discrimination? dispassion? control of the mind and the senses? etc.? which help him to attain knowledge of the Self. The Rajasic and the Tamasic (Asubha or evil) Vasnas (tendencies) which operate along the currents of RagaDvesha (likes and dislikes)? which induce one to perform actions which are prohibited by the scriptures and which produce disastrous effects? constitute demoniacal nature.In Asuric nature inclination towards sensual pleasures is predominant in Rakshasic nature hatred predominates and the Rakshasa does various sorts of harm and injury to others.Good tendencies lead to Moksha. Evil tendencies lead to bondage. Good tendencies must be cultivated. Evil tendencies should be eradicated. You shoul first have a knowledge of the essential nature of these two Vasanas? if you wish to cultivate the good tendencies and eradicate the evil ones. This sixteenth discourse gives a vivid description of these tendencies.Sattvasamsuddhih Purity of understanding? cleanliness of life or purity of heart. Purity of mind? i.e.? giving up of cheating? hypocrisy? untruth and the like? in all dealings with the people? and doing transactions with perfect honesty and integrity is Sattvasamsuddhi.When the understanding abides constantly in the immortal Self and is thus firm and steadfast? you may know this to be a condition of purity. On account of purity the mind can know the Self. The state of the mind wherein it is free from doubts like Asambhavana (thought of improbability of the existence of the Self)? etc.? through hearing of the scriptures is Sattvasamsuddhi. As purity of mind cannot be obtained without devotion to the Lord? devotion is implied in these Sattvic virtues.Jnana Knowledge understanding the nature of the Self? as taught in the scriptures and by the preceptor Selfrealisation through meditation on the Great Sentence of the Upanishad. I am Brahman (Aham Brahmasmi)? is Jnana.Yoga is union of the individual soul with the Supreme Being it is the direct realisation of the Self by concentration and meditation? through selfrestraint or control of the senses. The aspirant cognises through direct perception by the inner eye of intuition or wisdom what has been learnt from the scriptures and the preceptor. The aspirant attains Selfrealisation or direct knowledge. He becomes one with Brahman -- the Absolute. He gets indirect knowledge or mere understanding or theoretical knowledge of Brahman from the scriptures. Now through the practice of Yoga he gets direct knowledge. The attempt which is favourable for the annihilation of the mind and the latent tendencies is also known as Yoga.Jnanayogavyavasthitih The state of Jivanmukti attained through Jnana Yoga? which is distinct from the state of the worldlyminded persons.Fearlessness? purity of heart and steadfastness in knowledge and Yoga are the three preeminent virtues amongst the Sattvic attributes enumerated in verses 1 to 3. They are found in Jnana Yogins only. The other alities are common to Jnana Yogins? Karma Yogins? Raja Yogins and Bhaktas. Unless you possess Sattvic virtues? you cannot practise any kind of Yoga. If you cultivate one virtue? all other virtues will cling to you by themselves. Fearlessness is the basis and foundation of the whole of mans moral structure within.Svadhyaya and Tamas constitute Kriya Yoga. Svadhyaya constitutes BrahmaYajna. Almsgiving and sacrifice pertain to Karma Yoga. Almsgiving? selfcontrol and sacrifice constitute Daivi Sampat for householders. Those alities mentioned in chapter XVI? verses 1 to 3? which belong to the aspirant who practises a particular form of Yoga constitute the Daivi Sampat of the disciple on that path.Dana Almsgiving distributing food? clothes? etc.? as far as it iles in ones power? according to ones means. A charitable man hastens to comfort the distressed and helps the needy. Charity is of three kinds? viz.? Sattvic? Rajasic and Tamasic (see chapter XVII? 20 to 22). It opens the gates of heaven. It will bring nearer the means of liberation. Just as the tree gives fruit and shade without distinction? so also give to him who needs? without distinction? with a cheerful heart.Dama Selfrestraint? selfcontrol? control of the external senses. The control of the inner senses or the mind is described in the next verse.The practice of selfcontrol annihilates the union between the senses and the sensual objects. It separates the senses from their respective objects. The aspirant will not allow the wind of the sensual objects to blow through the gateway of his senses. He keeps the senses under the strictest restraint. He lights the fire of dispassion at all the ten gates of the body. He takes rigid vows. He observes Mauna (the vow of silence) and celibacy. He is moderate in his diet. He keeps the golden medium in everything. He checks the outgoing tendencies of the mind and the senses. He induces the mind and the senses to turn backwards towards their source. Just as an enemy is cut down by means of a weapon? so also every tendency towards sensual objects is cut down by the practice of selfcontrol. All internal promptings? cravings and Vasanas should be burnt in the fire of renunciation? at the ten gates of the senses. As householders cannot practise perfect control of the senses? even moderation or regulated and disciplined life will constitute selfrestraint for them. The practice of selfcontrol includes forgiveness? harmlessness? truth? steadiness and,patience.Yajna Sacrifice. The fireworship (Agnihotra) and the like enjoined in the Vedas and also the sacrifice to the gods (DevaYajna) or worship of the gods? PitriYajna? BhutaYajna? ManushyaYajna and BrahmaYajna enjoined in the scriptures (Smritis).Svadhyaya Study of the Vedas in order to attain the unseen fruits.Tapas Austerity? moritification of the body and other forms of penance. True Tapas is meditation on the Self. It is fixing the mind on Brahman or the Self. It is to separate oneself from the physical body and the other four sheaths and to identify oneself with the Absolute. It is to turn the mind towards the soul. The three kinds of Tapas mentioned in chapter XVII? verses 14 to 16 come under this category.Arjavam Straightforwardness. This is conducive to the attainment of knowledge. The aspirant should always be candid? upright or straightforward. Straightforwardness should be his constant attitutde. A just and truthful man alone can be straightforward. He is respected by the people. He is liked by all. He attains success in all his endeavours. He never hides facts or truth.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
"Lord Shri Krishna continued: Fearlessness, clean living, unceasing concentration on wisdom, readiness to give, self-control, a spirit of sacrifice, regular study of the scriptures, austerities, candour,

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purity of heart, steadfastness in knowledge and yoga, almsgiving, control of the senses, sacrifice, study of scriptures, austerity and straightforwardness.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that the twenty qualities mentioned here represent the path of a cultured person striving for spiritual growth. 'Abhayam' (fearlessness) is placed first because moral perfection is directly proportional to spiritual development. 'Sattvasamsuddhi' (purity of heart) represents honesty in transactions. 'Jnanayogavyavasthiti' (steadfastness in knowledge) means remaining detached from sensual pleasures by finding bliss in the Self. Senses are controlled through 'dama' (self-control), and resources are shared through 'dana' (charity) and 'yajna' (sacrifice). 'Svadhyaya' (self-study/introspection), 'tapas' (austerity), and 'arjavam' (straightforwardness/honesty in thoughts, words, and actions) help coordinate the personality and prevent division in life.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The Bhagavat said  Fearlessness, complete purity of the Sattva, steadfastness in knowledge-Yoga, charity, and self-restraint and [Vedic] sacrifice, recitation of scriptures, austerity, uprightness;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Lord said  Fearlessness, purity of mind, devotion to meditation on the knowledge (of the self), alms-giving, self-control, worship, study of Vedas, austerity, uprightness:

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The Blessed Lord said  Fearlessness, purity of mind, persistence in knowledge and yoga, charity and control of the external organs, sacrifice, (scriptural) study, austerity and recititude;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that 'tapas' refers to austerity such as celibacy and other vows that help in removing obstacles to spiritual progress.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the Blessed Lord now describes in detail the three kinds of nature (divine, demoniac, and fiendish) introduced in Chapter 9. Fearlessness means performing scriptural duties without doubt. Control of external senses (dama) and inner purity (sattvasamsuddhi) are essential for yoga.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The Blessed Lord said: Complete absence of fear, purity of mind, steadfastness in knowledge and yoga, charity, control of the senses, sacrifice, study of scriptures, performance of duties despite hardships, and simplicity of body, mind, and speech.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that fear arises from attachment to the body or temporary worldly items. When a devotee builds a relation with the Supreme, they become fearless. 'Sattvasamsuddhi' (purity of heart) is achieved when one gives up worldly desires and turns completely to God. 'Jnanayogavyavasthiti' is steadiness in the path of knowledge. Simplicity (arjavam) means aligning thoughts, words, and deeds in a straightforward manner.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The Lord said  'Fear' is the pain arising from the awareness of the cause which brings about pain in the form of either dissociation from the objects of attainment or association with the objects of aversion. The absence of this is 'fearlessness'. 'Purity of mind' is the condition of Sattva, viz., the state of the internal organ being untouched by Rajas and Tamas. 'Devotion to meditation on the knowledge (of the self)' is firm adherence to the discrimination between the pure nature of the self and Prakrti. 'Alms-giving' is the giving away of one's wealth earned through right means to the deserving. 'Self-control' is the practice of withdrawal of the mind from sense-objects. 'Worship' is the performance of the fivefold duties (sacrifices) etc., of life in the spirit of worship of the Lord without attachment to the fruits. The 'study of the Vedas' is devotion to the Vedic study with the conviction that all the teachings of the Vedas deal with the Lord, with His glorious nature and with the mode of worshipping Him. 'Austerity' is the practice of penances like Krchra, Candrayana, vow on the twelfth day of the lunar fortnight, etc., which foster capability for performing acts pleasing to the Lord. 'Uprightness' consists of the oneness of thought, word and deed in one's dealings with others.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.1–16.5 jointly): It has been stated  [at the end of the last chapter] that  'by understanding this' etc.  The thing called  'understanding' comes to be  [in  the following] manner :  After the knowledge, born from hearing  [the scriptures etc.],  there arises a thought-process consisting of the logical analysis,  deliberation and  deep meditation that take the form 'This (what is taught in the scriptures etc.)  is like this'.  The above thought-process is of the nature  of investigation, critical examination and judgement.  From this thought-process one gains a good knowledge of a well practised from i.e., a contemplation of that object, free from the humiliation (influence) of different category.  When this is gained, understanding is achieved  Hence, it will be declared :
 'By critically examining in this way fully, act as you please'.  (Ch. XVIII, 63).
 
Here, only the preceptor and the scripture are mainly capable of creating the scriptural knowledge.  But in producing reasoning, deliberation and meditation the main cause is the capacity to examine critically a thing and  it is a special attribute of the pupil and it is an important one.  Therefore, with an idea that this is in Arjuna and with an intention to add a preparatory note to the purposeful statement  'By critically examining this, [act as you please]'; the Bhagavat, the preceptor, says  'Fearlessness etc.'
 
The Ignorance, born of the Tamas (Stand) occupies the devilish side.  This is repelled  (or removed) by the well augmented wisdom that takes hold of the divine part.  This is the nature of things [under estion]  'You  (Arjuna) have taken refuge in the divine part viz., wisdom, born of the Sattva (Strand).  Therefore shirking off the internal Ignorance in the nature of delusion, you should undertake the action, that has the sanction of the scriptures and that is of the nature of eradicating the external foe having the form of ignorance.'  Thus commences the [present] chapter.  Hence -
 Abhayam etc., upto pandava.  These are the identification marks of a person of divine parts.  [Hence] they are clearly identified.  Self-restraint :  subduing the sense organs.  Thought-lessness :  the perfarmance of action without examining the antecedent and the seel; its absence is the absence of thought-lessness.  Vital power :  the act of casting away [all] limitations by taking hold energy in the Self.  [All] this is the divine wealth and this is for your total emancipation, as it destroys craving.  Therefore, don't get sorrow like 'Having killed brothers etc., how can I (Arjuna) enjoy pleasure ?'  [The idea of] the rest  [of passage] is clear.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Abhayam, fearlessness; sattva-samsuddhih, purtiy of the mind (sattva), mentally avoiding fraud, trickery, falsehood, etc. in dealings, i.e., honest behaviour; jnana-yoga-vyavasthitih, persistence in knowledge and yoga-jnana means knowledge of such subjects as the Self, learnt from scriptures and teachers; yoga means making those things that have been learnt matters of one's own personal experience through concentration by means of withdrawl of the organs etc.; persistence, steadfastness, in those two, knowledge and yoga;-this [This-refers to all the three from 'fearlessness' to 'persistence in knowledge and yoga'.] is the principal divine characteristic which is sattvika (born of the sattva ality). That nature which may occur in persons competent in their respective spheres, [Persons treading the path of Jnana-yoga or Karma-yoga have sattvika alities. Some of the alities mentioned in the first three verses occur only in the former, whereas the others are found in both or only in the latter.-Tr.]-that is said to be their sattvika attribute.
Danam, charity, distribution of food etc. according to one's ability; and damah, control of the external organs-the control of the internal organ, santih, will be referred to later; yajnah, sacrifices-Agnihotra etc. sanctioned by the Vedas, and sacrifices in honour of gods and others [Others: Those in honour of the manes, humans and other beings. Brahma-yajna, the fifth sacrifice, is referred to separately by svadhyaya.] sanctioned by the Smrtis: svadhyayah, study of the Rg-veda etc. for unseen results; tapah, austerity, those concerning the body, etc., which will be stated (17.14-16); arjavam, rectitude, straigthforwardness at all times-.
Further,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayadirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that 'abhayam' (fearlessness) is the foremost virtue because it builds the base of a seeker's moral structure. He explains that these attributes constitute the divine wealth (daivi sampat) leading to liberation.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the sixteenth chapter describes the divine and demoniac qualities to help seekers accept the former and abandon the latter. Fearlessness is the chief virtue of the sattvic nature.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that a devotee who has faith in the scriptures and follows them is protected from all fears. Purity of heart and steadfastness in knowledge are necessary steps on the path of liberation.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that fearlessness is the key indicator of a person's faith in the Supreme. Purity of mind is achieved by discarding rajas and tamas.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that fearlessness is born out of complete faith in the protection of the Lord. Purity of heart refers to selfless devotion.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that fearlessness is the basis of spiritual life. Cultivating fearlessness and purity of mind helps the seeker transition from the worldly path to the path of devotion.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Fearlessness; purification of one's existence; cultivation of spiritual knowledge; charity; self-control; performance of sacrifice; study of the Vedas; austerity; simplicity; nonviolence; truthfulness; freedom from anger; renunciation; tranquility; aversion to faultfinding; compassion for all living entities; freedom from covetousness; gentleness; modesty; steady determination; vigor; forgiveness; fortitude; cleanliness; and freedom from envy and from the passion for honor—these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with divine nature.

 In the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this material world was explained. The extra roots coming out of it were compared to the activities of the living entities, some auspicious, some inauspicious. In the Ninth Chapter, also, the devas, or godly, and the asuras, the ungodly, or demons, were explained. Now, according to Vedic rites, activities in the mode of goodness are considered auspicious for progress on the path of liberation, and such activities are known as daivī prakṛti, transcendental by nature. Those who are situated in the transcendental nature make progress on the path of liberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion and ignorance, on the other hand, there is no possibility of liberation. Either they will have to remain in this material world as human beings, or they will descend among the species of animals or even lower life forms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord explains both the transcendental nature and its attendant qualities and the demoniac nature and its qualities. He also explains the advantages and disadvantages of these qualities. The word abhijātasya in reference to one born of transcendental qualities or godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child in a godly atmosphere is known in the Vedic scriptures as Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. If the parents want a child in the godly qualities they should follow the ten principles recommended for the social life of the human being. In Bhagavad-gītā we have studied also before that sex life for begetting a good child is Kṛṣṇa Himself. Sex life is not condemned, provided the process is used in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness at least should not beget children like cats and dogs but should beget them so that they may become Kṛṣṇa conscious after birth. That should be the advantage of children born of a father and mother absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The social institution known as varṇāśrama-dharma – the institution dividing society into four divisions of social life and four occupational divisions or castes – is not meant to divide human society according to birth. Such divisions are in terms of educational qualifications. They are to keep the society in a state of peace and prosperity. The qualities mentioned herein are explained as transcendental qualities meant for making a person progress in spiritual understanding so that he can get liberated from the material world. In the varṇāśrama institution the sannyāsī, or the person in the renounced order of life, is considered to be the head or the spiritual master of all the social statuses and orders. A brāhmaṇa is considered to be the spiritual master of the three other sections of a society, namely, the kṣatriyas, the vaiśyas and the śūdras, but a sannyāsī, who is on the top of the institution, is considered to be the spiritual master of the brāhmaṇas also. For a sannyāsī, the first qualification should be fearlessness. Because a sannyāsī has to be alone without any support or guarantee of support, he has simply to depend on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one thinks, “After I leave my connections, who will protect me?” he should not accept the renounced order of life. One must be fully convinced that Kṛṣṇa or the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His localized aspect as Paramātmā is always within, that He is seeing everything, and He always knows what one intends to do. One must thus have firm conviction that Kṛṣṇa as Paramātmā will take care of a soul surrendered to Him. “I shall never be alone,” one should think. “Even if I live in the darkest regions of a forest I shall be accompanied by Kṛṣṇa, and He will give me all protection.” That conviction is called abhayam, fearlessness. This state of mind is necessary for a person in the renounced order of life. Then he has to purify his existence. There are so many rules and regulations to be followed in the renounced order of life. Most important of all, a sannyāsī is strictly forbidden to have any intimate relationship with a woman. He is even forbidden to talk with a woman in a secluded place. Lord Caitanya was an ideal sannyāsī, and when He was at Purī His feminine devotees could not even come near to offer their respects. They were advised to bow down from a distant place. This is not a sign of hatred for women as a class, but it is a stricture imposed on the sannyāsī not to have close connections with women. One has to follow the rules and regulations of a particular status of life in order to purify his existence. For a sannyāsī, intimate relations with women and possession of wealth for sense gratification are strictly forbidden. The ideal sannyāsī was Lord Caitanya Himself, and we can learn from His life that He was very strict in regards to women. Although He is considered to be the most liberal incarnation of Godhead, accepting the most fallen conditioned souls, He strictly followed the rules and regulations of the sannyāsa order of life in connection with association with women. One of His personal associates, namely Choṭa Haridāsa, was associated with Lord Caitanya along with His other confidential personal associates, but somehow or other this Choṭa Haridāsa looked lustily on a young woman, and Lord Caitanya was so strict that He at once rejected him from the society of His personal associates. Lord Caitanya said, “For a sannyāsī or anyone who is aspiring to get out of the clutches of material nature and trying to elevate himself to the spiritual nature and go back home, back to Godhead, for him, looking toward material possessions and women for sense gratification – not even enjoying them, but just looking toward them with such a propensity – is so condemned that he had better commit suicide before experiencing such illicit desires.” So these are the processes for purification. The next item is jñāna-yoga-vyavasthiti: being engaged in the cultivation of knowledge. Sannyāsī life is meant for distributing knowledge to the householders and others who have forgotten their real life of spiritual advancement. A sannyāsī is supposed to beg from door to door for his livelihood, but this does not mean that he is a beggar. Humility is also one of the qualifications of a transcendentally situated person, and out of sheer humility the sannyāsī goes from door to door, not exactly for the purpose of begging, but to see the householders and awaken them to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the duty of a sannyāsī. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by his spiritual master, he should preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness with logic and understanding, and if one is not so advanced he should not accept the renounced order of life. But even if one has accepted the renounced order of life without sufficient knowledge, he should engage himself fully in hearing from a bona fide spiritual master to cultivate knowledge. A sannyāsī, or one in the renounced order of life, must be situated in fearlessness, sattva-saṁśuddhi (purity) and jñāna-yoga (knowledge). The next item is charity. Charity is meant for the householders. The householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spend fifty percent of their income to propagate Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. Thus a householder should give in charity to institutional societies that are engaged in that way. Charity should be given to the right receiver. There are different kinds of charity, as will be explained later on – charity in the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. Charity in the mode of goodness is recommended by the scriptures, but charity in the modes of passion and ignorance is not recommended, because it is simply a waste of money. Charity should be given only to propagate Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. That is charity in the mode of goodness. Then as far as dama (self-control) is concerned, it is not only meant for other orders of religious society, but is especially meant for the householder. Although he has a wife, a householder should not use his senses for sex life unnecessarily. There are restrictions for the householders even in sex life, which should only be engaged in for the propagation of children. If he does not require children, he should not enjoy sex life with his wife. Modern society enjoys sex life with contraceptive methods or more abominable methods to avoid the responsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental quality, but is demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to make progress in spiritual life, he must control his sex life and should not beget a child without the purpose of serving Kṛṣṇa. If he is able to beget children who will be in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can produce hundreds of children, but without this capacity one should not indulge only for sense pleasure. Sacrifice is another item to be performed by the householders, because sacrifices require a large amount of money. Those in other orders of life, namely brahmacarya, vānaprastha and sannyāsa, have no money; they live by begging. So performance of different types of sacrifice is meant for the householders. They should perform agni-hotra sacrifices as enjoined in the Vedic literature, but such sacrifices at the present moment are very expensive, and it is not possible for any householder to perform them. The best sacrifice recommended in this age is called saṅkīrtana-yajña. This saṅkīrtana-yajña, the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, is the best and most inexpensive sacrifice; everyone can adopt it and derive benefit. So these three items, namely charity, sense control and performance of sacrifice, are meant for the householder. Then svādhyāya, Vedic study, is meant for brahmacarya, or student life. Brahmacārīs should have no connection with women; they should live a life of celibacy and engage the mind in the study of Vedic literature for cultivation of spiritual knowledge. This is called svādhyāya. Tapas, or austerity, is especially meant for the retired life. One should not remain a householder throughout his whole life; he must always remember that there are four divisions of life – brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. So after gṛhastha, householder life, one should retire. If one lives for a hundred years, he should spend twenty-five years in student life, twenty-five in householder life, twenty-five in retired life and twenty-five in the renounced order of life. These are the regulations of the Vedic religious discipline. A man retired from household life must practice austerities of the body, mind and tongue. That is tapasya. The entire varṇāśrama-dharma society is meant for tapasya. Without tapasya, or austerity, no human being can get liberation. The theory that there is no need of austerity in life, that one can go on speculating and everything will be nice, is recommended neither in the Vedic literature nor in Bhagavad-gītā . Such theories are manufactured by show-bottle spiritualists who are trying to gather more followers. If there are restrictions, rules and regulations, people will not become attracted. Therefore those who want followers in the name of religion, just to have a show only, don’t restrict the lives of their students, nor their own lives. But that method is not approved by the Vedas. As far as the brahminical quality of simplicity is concerned, not only should a particular order of life follow this principle, but every member, be he in the brahmacārī āśrama, gṛhastha āśrama, vānaprastha āśrama or sannyāsa āśrama. One should be very simple and straightforward. Ahiṁsā means not arresting the progressive life of any living entity. One should not think that since the spirit spark is never killed even after the killing of the body there is no harm in killing animals for sense gratification. People are now addicted to eating animals, in spite of having an ample supply of grains, fruits and milk. There is no necessity for animal killing. This injunction is for everyone. When there is no alternative, one may kill an animal, but it should be offered in sacrifice. At any rate, when there is an ample food supply for humanity, persons who are desiring to make advancement in spiritual realization should not commit violence to animals. Real ahiṁsā means not checking anyone’s progressive life. The animals are also making progress in their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one category of animal life to another. If a particular animal is killed, then his progress is checked. If an animal is staying in a particular body for so many days or so many years and is untimely killed, then he has to come back again in that form of life to complete the remaining days in order to be promoted to another species of life. So their progress should not be checked simply to satisfy one’s palate. This is called ahiṁsā. Satyam. This word means that one should not distort the truth for some personal interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficult passages, but the meaning or the purpose should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master. That is the process for understanding the Vedas. Śruti means that one should hear from the authority. One should not construe some interpretation for his personal interest. There are so many commentaries on Bhagavad-gītā that misinterpret the original text. The real import of the word should be presented, and that should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master. Akrodha means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one should be tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomes polluted. Anger is a product of the mode of passion and lust, so one who is transcendentally situated should check himself from anger. Apaiśunam means that one should not find fault with others or correct them unnecessarily. Of course to call a thief a thief is not faultfinding, but to call an honest person a thief is very much offensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hrī means that one should be very modest and must not perform some act which is abominable. Acāpalam, determination, means that one should not be agitated or frustrated in some attempt. There may be failure in some attempt, but one should not be sorry for that; he should make progress with patience and determination. The word tejas used here is meant for the kṣatriyas. The kṣatriyas should always be very strong to be able to give protection to the weak. They should not pose themselves as nonviolent. If violence is required, they must exhibit it. But a person who is able to curb down his enemy may under certain conditions show forgiveness. He may excuse minor offenses. Śaucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one’s dealings also. It is especially meant for the mercantile people, who should not deal in the black market. Nāti-mānitā, not expecting honor, applies to the śūdras, the worker class, which are considered, according to Vedic injunctions, to be the lowest of the four classes. They should not be puffed up with unnecessary prestige or honor and should remain in their own status. It is the duty of the śūdras to offer respect to the higher class for the upkeep of the social order. All these twenty-six qualifications mentioned are transcendental qualities. They should be cultivated according to the different statuses of social and occupational order. The purport is that even though material conditions are miserable, if these qualities are developed by practice, by all classes of men, then gradually it is possible to rise to the highest platform of transcendental realization.