Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śreyo hi jñānamabhyāsājjñānāddhyānaṃ viśiṣyate .
dhyānātkarmaphalatyāgastyāgācchāntiranantaram

Word Meanings:
श्रेयः - better
हि - indeed
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
अभ्यासात् - than practice
ज्ञानात् - than knowledge
ध्यानम् - meditation
विशिष्यते - excels
ध्यानात् - than meditation
कर्मफलत्यागः - renunciation of fruits of action
त्यागात् - from renunciation
शान्तिः - peace
अनन्तरम् - immediately.

Life Application:
Knowledge is better than mechanical practice; meditation excels knowledge; surrendering action fruits excels meditation, bringing immediate peace.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Knowledge is indeed superior to practice; meditation is superior to knowledge; and renunciation of the fruits of action is even superior to meditation; from renunciation, peace immediately follows.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Better indeed is knowledge than practice; than knowledge meditation is better; than meditation the renunciation of the fruits of actions: peace immediately follows renunciation.

श्रेयः better? हि indeed? ज्ञानम् knowledge? अभ्यासात् than practice? ज्ञानात् than knowledge? ध्यानम् meditation? विशिष्यते excels? ध्यानात् than meditation? कर्मफलत्यागः the renunciation of the fruits of actions? त्यागात् from renunciation? शान्तिः peace? अनन्तरम् immediately.Commentary Theoretical or indirect knowledge of Brahman gained from the scriptures is better than the practice (of restraining the modifications of the mind or worship of idols or selfmortification for the purpose of control of the mind and the senses) accompained with ignorance. Meditation is better than theoretical knowledge. Renunciation of the fruits of actions is bettern than meditation. Renunciation of the fruits of all actions as a means to the attainment of supreme peace or Moksha is merely eulogised here by the declaration of the superiority of one over the other to encourage Arjuna (and other spiritual aspirants) to practise Nishkama Karma Yoga? to create a strong desire in them to take up the Yoga of selfless action? in the same manner as by saying that the ocean was drunk by the Brahmana sage Agastya even the Brahmanas of this age are extolled because they are also Brahmanas.Desire is an enemy of peace. Desire causes restlessness of the mind. Desire is the source of all human miseries? sorrows and troubles. Stop the play of desire through discrimination? dispassion and eniry into the nature of the Self then you will enjoy supreme peace.Renunciation of the fruits of actions? is prescribed for the purification of the aspirants heart. It annihlates desire? the enemy of wisdom. The sage? too? renounces the fruits of actions. It has become natural to him to do so.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Knowledge is superior to blind action, meditation to mere knowledge, renunciation of the fruit of action to meditation, and where there is renunciation peace will follow.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
While instructing a confused disciple, it is not enough for a teacher to merely name and enumerate philosophical truths. There is a need for a beautiful integration of those ideas so that the student gets all the ideas in one place like a bouquet. This helps in understanding the essence. The verse under consideration from Lord Krishna's discourse is one such special example, where the theoretical discussions held so far are presented in a well-integrated system of thought.

In this verse, theoretical ideas are arranged in descending order of their importance. Once the seeker understands this ladder of spiritual practice well and also learns the art of ascending and descending this ladder, it can be assumed that he has fully understood all the important topics discussed in this chapter.

Knowledge is better than practice: Spiritual practices are not merely physical actions, but their purpose is to integrate our mind and intellect, i.e., our inner personality. Devotional practice performed through the body will not receive the cooperation of the inner self until the seeker has proper knowledge of the practice he is performing. Before physical actions can be supported by the mind's devotional feelings, a transformation of the intellect is essential. What we are practicing and what its purpose is—having full knowledge of this is indispensable for making Yoga successful. Therefore, it is said here that instead of merely practicing mechanically, it is much better and more important to have knowledge of its psychological, intellectual, and spiritual implications.

Meditation is better than knowledge: Meditating on the knowledge gained from means like listening is superior to that knowledge. It is easier to learn the scriptural knowledge of the process and purpose of spiritual practices than to understand them. To assimilate the knowledge gained from listening, thoughtful reflection and meditation upon it are required. This cannot be achieved by merely knowing the literal meaning of scriptural sentences. Therefore, reflection and deep meditation are indispensable. Knowledge assimilated is certainly superior to knowledge merely heard, and the means to assimilate it is meditation. Therefore, in the order of importance, meditation is said to be superior to knowledge.

Renunciation of the fruits of action is better than meditation: The intellect's effort to soar beyond the limits of currently acquired knowledge to attain far superior knowledge is called meditation. For this flight, the intellect must possess strength and balance. Practice of meditation is impossible for that person whose mind's strength and stability have been shattered by anxiety and imagination about future results. We have seen in the commentary of the previous verse how our anxiety and worry about the future destroy our capacity to act in the present. All fruits of action belong to the future, and to worry about them means to invite countless mental distractions. A seeker with such a disturbed inner self can neither reflect nor meditate on the truth expounded in the scriptures. Therefore, here Lord Krishna gives the highest place to the renunciation of the fruits of action.

Adding a comment to His statement, the Lord says that peace immediately follows renunciation. In Hinduism, the real meaning of Sannyasa (renunciation) is to give up the binding attachments to the enjoyment of pleasures arising from the contact of the senses with their objects.

As a result of this renunciation, the seeker attains powerful peace and stability of the inner self. In such a peaceful environment, the intellect is able to reflect on the scriptural knowledge and properly understand the means of self-development described therein, and by practicing meditation with knowledge in this manner, the seeker definitely achieves success.

Now, the internal characteristics of the wise devotees who worship the Imperishable and the Unmanifest are being described in the next verse, which are the direct means for seekers to attain perfection.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
For, knowledge is superior to practice; because of knowledge, meditation becomes pre-eminent; from meditation issues the renunciation of fruits of actions; and to renunciation, peace remains next.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Far better is knowledge of the self then the repeated practice (of remembrance of the Lord). Better is meditation than this knowledge; Better is renunciation of fruits of action than meditation. From such renunciation, peace ensues.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Knowledge is surely superior to practice; meditation surpasses knowledge. The renunciation of the results of works (excels) meditation. From renunciation, Peace follows immediately.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Knowledge is indeed superior to practice born of ignorance. Meditation accompanied by knowledge is superior to mere knowledge. And so it is stated in the Anabhimlana branch of the Sama Veda: 'Knowledge is greater than mere practice; meditation accompanied by that knowledge is greater still; therefrom comes direct perception, and from that, peace will ensue.' The statement 'renunciation of the fruits of action is superior to meditation' is only for praise. Otherwise, why would it be said, 'If you are unable to do this...'? And it is also said, 'Karma Yoga is superior to the renunciation of actions' (BG 5.2). They cite meditation as the highest: 'Knowledge and devotion are greater than meditation on the Supreme Self. Desiring not the fruits of action, dispassion, and renunciation are not worthy of even a fraction of the fruit of knowledge,' so is stated in the Kashayana branch. Even though there is similarity in words, since this is spoken in reference to one who is incapable, the lack of real intent in the other statement is understood. Moreover, the praise of renunciation is appropriate because it is a cause for obtaining meditation, etc. Meditation combined with the renunciation of fruits is superior to mere meditation. Only renunciation combined with meditation is spoken of here. Otherwise, how could it be said, 'peace immediately follows renunciation', and how could it be superior to meditation? And so it is said in the Gaupavana branch: 'Meditation combined with renunciation is superior to mere meditation.' Indeed, liberation does not happen immediately after mere renunciation, but it does happen from renunciation combined with meditation. Even in this way, it is a praise of mere renunciation. Just as it is said, 'The king is the conqueror when joined with this (soldier), not otherwise.'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The purpose of the subsequent verse is stated—'Idanim' (now). 'Jnana' (knowledge) is the conviction regarding the Self obtained through scriptures and reasoning. 'Abhyasa' (practice) is the repeated listening for the sake of knowledge, or the practice of meditation preceded by conviction. In its superiority, being the cause of direct realization is the reason. In the superiority of renunciation, the reason is given—'Evam' (thus). Under the condition that it is preceded by the renunciation of actions with the attitude 'May the Lord be pleased,' it means for a person who has controlled his mind and possesses the previously mentioned qualifications, such renunciation is prescribed. The statement 'immediately indeed' is explained—'Natu' (not that...). Not that the immediate peace-giving nature of renunciation of fruits of action contradicts the scriptural and traditional consensus that right knowledge alone produces it. In that regard, it is said—'Ajnasya' (for the ignorant). Since the cessation of transmigratory suffering occurs through direct realization of the reality arising from meditation practiced continuously and with reverence over a long period, the statement of the superiority of renunciation over such meditation is intended as an eulogy of it. The reason for this is given—'Sampanna' (attained). Among the attained means like worship of the Imperishable, since the latter is prescribed when one is unable to practice the former, and the instruction culminates in renunciation, the eulogy is justified. By what similarity is it an eulogy? The answer is given—'Yada' (when). Immortality is declared through the text 'When all desires...'. The renunciation of all desires is well known as the cause of immortality in passages like 'he who does not desire...'. Even though the renunciation of the fruits of actions is for the ignorant, since it shares the common feature of 'renouncing all desires' with the enlightened one's renunciation, the eulogy of the renunciation of the fruits of all actions is meant to generate interest. The eulogy is illustrated by an example—'Yatha' (just as). If renunciation of fruits is the cause of the highest good, then since the renunciation of actions also leads to the renunciation of fruits, one might think that performing actions is useless. To this, it is said—'Evam karma' (thus, action). Since the performance of action offered to God without desire for fruits is intended as the cause of the highest good, performing action is not useless.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Knowledge is indeed superior to practice; meditation is superior to knowledge; and the renunciation of the fruits of all actions is superior to meditation. Peace immediately follows the renunciation of the fruits of actions.

Explanation—[From the eighth to the eleventh verses, the Lord prescribed four successive spiritual practices: surrender-yoga, practice-yoga, actions for the sake of the Lord, and renunciation of the fruits of actions, as alternatives when one is unable to perform the preceding ones. This might make it appear that each successive practice is of a lower grade than the preceding one, and that the renunciation of the fruits of action, mentioned at the end, is of the lowest grade. This idea is also supported by the fact that in the first three practices, the result of attaining the Lord was mentioned alongside; but in the eleventh verse, where the renunciation of the fruits of action is commanded, the result of attaining the Lord is not mentioned.

To remove these misconceptions, this twelfth verse is spoken. Here, the Lord has described the renunciation of the fruits of action as superior and as yielding immediate supreme peace, so that no one considers this fourth practice to be of a lower category. This is because in this practice, the renunciation of attachment, sense of possession, and desire for fruits is dominant. Consequently, the same Truth that is attained by performing surrender-yoga, practice-yoga, and action for the Lord is also attained by the renunciation of the fruits of action.

In reality, all four practices are independent means to attain the Lord. It is only due to the difference in the inclination, faith, and capability of the seekers that the Lord has spoken of different practices from the eighth to the eleventh verses.

As for the question of stating the result of the renunciation of the fruits of action (attainment of the Lord) separately in the twelfth verse, it should be considered that it is well-known that performing surrender-yoga, practice-yoga, and actions for the Lord leads to the attainment of God. However, it is not well-known that the renunciation of the fruits of action also leads to the attainment of God. Therefore, the twelfth verse has been spoken to show its superiority over the commonly practiced means, and it is appropriate to state the fruit of the renunciation of the fruits of action in this very verse.]

'śreyo hi jñānamabhyāsāt'— Sage Patanjali says: 'tatra sthitau yatno'bhyāsaḥ' (Yoga Darshana 1.13), which means that the repeated effort to achieve stability in a particular subject is called 'practice'. Here, the word 'practice' refers only to the action of practice, not to practice-yoga; because in this practice (of pranayama, mind-control, etc.), there is no scriptural knowledge or meditation, nor is there the renunciation of the desire for fruits of action. Yoga occurs only when the connection with inert matter is severed, whereas in the practice mentioned above, there is reliance on inert matter. Here, the word 'knowledge' means scriptural knowledge, not realization of the Truth; because realization of the Truth is the result of all spiritual practices. Therefore, the knowledge with which practice is compared here has neither practice, nor meditation, nor the renunciation of the fruits of action. Compared to such practice, which lacks knowledge, meditation, and renunciation of fruits, scriptural knowledge is indeed superior.

'jñānāddhyānaṃ viśiṣyate'— Here, the word 'meditation' refers only to the action of concentration of the mind, not to meditation-yoga. In this meditation, there is no scriptural knowledge or renunciation of the fruits of action. Such meditation is superior to that knowledge which is devoid of practice, meditation, and renunciation of fruits. This is because meditation controls the mind, whereas mere scriptural knowledge does not control the mind. Therefore, the energy accumulated through meditation due to mind-control is not obtained through scriptural knowledge. If the seeker wants to use that energy to proceed towards God, the ease he experiences will not be felt by one who has only scriptural knowledge.

'dhyānātkarmaphalatyāgah'— The 'renunciation of the fruits of action' devoid of knowledge and meditation is superior to 'meditation' devoid of knowledge and renunciation of fruits. Here, the renunciation of the fruits of action does not mean the physical renunciation of actions and their fruits, but rather the renunciation of possessiveness, attachment, and desire in actions and their fruits. All transient and perishable things are the fruits of action. Renunciation of attachment to them is the renunciation of the fruits of all actions. Attachment and desire for fruits in actions are the cause of bondage in the world. By having no attachment and desire for fruits, the person who renounces the fruits of actions easily becomes free from the bondage of the world.

'tyāgācchāntiranantaram'— Here, the word 'tyāgāt' has been used for 'the renunciation of the fruits of action'. The nature of renunciation needs to be understood specifically. Renunciation can neither be of that which is one's own nature, nor can it be of that with which one has no relationship. Therefore, in reality, renunciation is only of that which is not one's own, but has been mistakenly assumed to be one's own. The soul itself is conscious and immortal, and the world is inert and perishable. The soul, by mistake, considers the alien world as its own. Therefore, there is a need to renounce only the assumed relationship with the world. Here, the word 'śāntiḥ' means the attainment of supreme peace. This itself is called the attainment of God. In the renunciation of the fruits of actions, i.e., in karma-yoga, attachment to actions and their fruits is renounced from the very beginning. Therefore, due to the absence of relationship with matter, the karma-yogi quickly attains supreme peace.

Special point regarding the renunciation of the fruits of action: 'Renunciation of the fruits of action' is another name for karma-yoga. In karma-yoga, the renunciation of attachment to fruits is primary. Health-illness, wealth-poverty, respect-insult, praise-censure, etc., all favorable-unfavorable situations come as the fruits of actions. If there is attraction-aversion towards them, God can never be attained. In reality, actions are never binding. The root cause of bondage is desire and attachment to fruits. When desire and attachment to fruits are destroyed, all actions become non-actions.

Special point regarding the practice: If we look thoughtfully at the three practices mentioned by the Lord, each practice includes the other two practices as well. In reality, the seeker should first make his goal or purpose firm. The ease or difficulty of any practice depends on the seeker's 'interest' and 'purpose'. The practice becomes easy when the interest and purpose are both in God. In this section, the Lord has explained four practices for the welfare of mankind: (1) surrender-yoga, (2) practice-yoga, (3) performance of all actions for the sake of the Lord, and (4) renunciation of the fruits of all actions. All four practices are equally independent and superior. If the seeker does not let any deficiency come in his purpose, feelings, efforts, dedication, eagerness, etc., the Lord Himself makes him attain Him.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
More than the practice of remembrance (of the Lord), which is difficult in the absence of love for the Lord, the direct knowledge of the self, arising from the contemplation of the imperishable self (Aksara), is conducive to the well-being of the self. Better than the imperfect knowledge of the self, is perfect meditation on the self, as it is more conducive to the well-being of the self. More conducive than imperfect meditation (i.e., meditation unaccompanied with renunciation), is the activity performed with renunciation of the fruits.

It is only after the annihilation of sins, through the performance of works accompanied by renounciation of fruits, that peace of mind is attained. When the mind is at peace, perfect meditation on the self is possible. From meditation results the direct realisation of the self. From the direct realisation of the self results supreme devotion. It is in this way that Atmanistha or devotion to the individual self becomes useful for a person who is incapable of practising loving devotion to the Supreme Being. And for one practising the discipline for attaining the self (Jnana Yoga) without acisition of perfect tranillity of mind, disinterested activity (Karma Yoga), including in it meditation on the self, is the better path for the knowledge of the self. [Thus the steps are performance of works without desire for fruits, eanimity of mind, meditation on the self, self-realisation, and devotion to the Lord.]

Now Sri Krsna enumerates the attributes reired of one intent on performance of disinterested activity:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sreyah etc.   Knowledge in the form of entering into  [the Lord] is superior to practice;  for practice bears that result.  Due to the entering into the Lord, the meditation i.e.,  getting  absorbed  in the Bhagavat,  becomes pre-eminent i.e., attains superiority,  because of the achievement of what is desired.  When meditation i.e.,  getting absorbed in the Bhagavat is accomplished, then it is possible to renounce  fruits of actions.  Otherwise how can there be a renunciation in what is unknown ?  When renunciation of fruits of actions is achieved, there arises an uninterrupted peace.  Therefore, being the root of all  [these], the knowledge a'one, in the form of fixing the mind in  the Lord is important.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Jnanam, knowledge; [Firm conviction about the Self arrived at through Vedic texts and reasoning.] is hi, surely; sreyah, superior; -to what?-abhyasat, to practice [Practice-repeated effort to ascertain the true meaning of Vedic texts, in order to acire knowledge.] which is not preceded by discrimination. Dhyanam, meditation, undertaken along with knowledge; visisyate, surpasses even jnanat, that knowledge. Karma-phala-tyagah, renunciation of the results of works; excels even dhyanat, meditation associated with knowledge. ('Excels' has to be supplied.) Tyagat, from this renunciation of the results of actions, in the way described before; [By dedicating all actions to God with the idea, 'May God be pleased.'] santih, Peace, the cessation of transmigratory existence together with its cause; follows anantaram, immediately; not that it awaits another accasion.
Should the unenlightened person engaged in works be unable to practise the disciplines enjoined earlier, then, for him has been enjoined renunciation of the results of all works as a means to Liberation. But this has not been done at the very beginning. And for this reason renunciation of the results of all works has been praised in, 'Knowledge is surely superior to practice,' etc. by teaching about the successive excellence. For it has been taught as being fit to be adopted by one in case he is unable to practise the disciplines already presented [Presented from verse 3 onwards.]
Objection: From what similarly does the eulogy follow?
Reply: In the verse, 'When all desires clinging to one's heart fall off' (Ka, 2.3.14), it has been stated that Immortality results from the rejection of all desires. That is well known. And 'all desires' means the 'result of all rites and duties enjoined in the Vedas and Smrtis'. From the renunciation of these, Peace surely comes immediately to the enlightened man who is steadfast in Knowledge.
There is a similarity between renunciation of all desires and renunciation of the results of actions by an unenlightened person. Hence, on account of that similarity this eulogy of renunciation of the results of all actions is meant for rousing interest. As for instance, by saying that the sea was drunk up by the Brahmana Agastya, the Brahmanas of the present day are also praised owing to the similarity of Brahminhood. In this way it was been said that Karma-yoga becomes a means for Liberation,since it involves renunciaton of the rewards of works.
Here, again, the Yoga consisting in the concentration of mind on God as the Cosmic Person, as also the performance of actions etc. for God, have been spoken of by assuming a difference between God and Self. In, 'If you are unable to do even this' (11) since it has been hinted that it (Karma-yoga) is an effect of ignorance, therefore the Lord is pointing out that Karma-yoga is not suitable for the meditator on the Immutable, who is aware of idenity (of the Self with God). The Lord is similarly pointing out the impossibility of a karma-yogin's meditation on the Immutable.
In (the verse), 'they৷৷.attain Me alone' (4), having declared that those who meditate on the Immutable are independent so far as the attainment of Liberation is concerned, the Lord has shown in, '৷৷.I become the Deliverer' (7), that others have no independence; they are dependent on God. For, if they (the former) be considered to have become identified with God, they would be the same as the Immutable on account of (their) having realized non-difference. Conseently, speaking of them as objects of the act of deliverance will become inappropriate!
And, since the Lord in surely the greatest well-wisher of Arjuna, He imparts instructions only about Karma-yoga, which involves perception of duality and is not associated with full Illumination. Also, no one who has realized his Self as God through valid means of knowledge would like subordination to another, since it involves a contradiction. Therefore, with the idea, 'I shall speak of the group of virtues (as stated in), "He hwo is not hateful towards any creature," etc. which are the direct means to Immortality, to those monks who meditate on the Immutable,who are steadfast in full enlightenment and have given up all desires,' the Lord proceeds:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Objection: Since knowledge is the means for practice, how can it be superior to that? To this, he says—'Ajnanati' (due to ignorance...). 'Eva' means only. The statement 'meditation is superior to knowledge' is incorrect, because knowledge combined with meditation is possible, and meditation preceded by ignorance is also possible. To this, he says—'Jnanamatraditi' (than mere knowledge). He supports the logical conclusion with scriptures—'Tatha cheti' (and so...). 'Tatsahitam' means meditation combined with knowledge. That is greater than mere knowledge. To dispel any misunderstanding about the statement 'renunciation of fruits of action is superior to meditation', he explains—'Dhyanaditi'. Only the excellence of renunciation is indicated by this, not that the literal meaning is the intent. Why? To this, he says—'Anyatha' (otherwise). 'If you are unable to do even this' (12.11). Otherwise, if renunciation of fruits is indeed superior to meditation, how could it be prescribed for one who is incapable of performing even karma-yoga, which is inferior to meditation? And it is said, 'Karma-yoga is superior to the renunciation of actions, what to speak of meditation-yoga, which is superior to all actions' (cf. BG 5.2). 'Paramatman' means in reference to the Supreme Self. 'Viragah' means the absence of false superimposition. Objection: Even if the statements are similar, how is the lack of intent in its literal sense explained in the statement 'dhyanad' despite the contradiction with 'tayostu'? To this, he says—'Vakya' (sentence). Even though there is similarity as sentences, the other statement is stronger because of logical support. He states the logical reason for the literal sense in 'dhyanad'—'Dhyanadi' (meditation, etc.). Renunciation is spoken of as a cause for obtaining knowledge and meditation in texts like 'having examined the worlds...'. And the means cannot be superior to the end. Therefore, this is also a praise. By this, the implied meaning is also extracted. He explains in another way—'Kevala' (mere). Meditation without renunciation. Objection: How is 'mere' determined from 'dhyanad', and how is 'renunciation of fruits' or the renunciation combined with meditation indicated? To this, he says—'Dhyana' (meditation). By the two statements, namely meditation combined with renunciation and renunciation combined with meditation, he indicates the two ways. Otherwise, if only mere renunciation is accepted, he asks 'how indeed...' and 'otherwise...'. Not only is this meaning established by logical necessity, but also by the scriptures—'Tatha cheti'. He explains the first logical necessity—'Na hi' (indeed, not...). From the scriptural text 'therefrom comes direct realization', this is the idea. If the above is accepted, why is there no logical inconsistency? He answers—'Bhavati cheti'. It is related to 'tyagat' (from renunciation), with the mediation of mere knowledge. The second logical inconsistency is explained in 'tayostu' (BG 5.2). Objection: By the text 'If you are unable to do even this' (12.11), mere renunciation is prescribed. To generate interest in it, the praise starts with 'Knowledge is indeed...' (12.12). If the explanation is that meditation combined with renunciation is superior to mere meditation, then the praise is of meditation combined with renunciation, not of mere renunciation. Therefore, the first explanation is more consistent with the context, and the second is inconsistent. To this, he says—'Kevala' (mere). Just as it is said, 'The king is the conqueror when joined with this servant, not otherwise,' which praises the servant, in the same way, in this second explanation also, the praise of mere renunciation is justified. Because the assistance of renunciation is stated as the cause for the superiority of one meditation over another.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
He praises this renunciation of fruits—'Sreyo hi' etc. Compared to the aforementioned practice, knowledge accompanied by instruction with reasoning is superior. Compared to that, meditation, which is devotion (constant contemplation), is superior. Compared to that, the renunciation of fruits is superior. Immediately after that, peace, which is mental composure, ensues. Composure is the quietude of the mind in gain and loss, victory and defeat, and from that, the attainment of one's purpose is established.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Now, since the instruction on the means culminates here, he praises this renunciation of the fruits of all actions—'Sreyo hi' etc. Knowledge, which is conviction of the Self through scriptures and reasoning, is indeed superior to practice, which is the repeated listening for the sake of knowledge. Meditation, known as nididhyasana (constant contemplation), is superior even to that knowledge which is accomplished through listening and reflection, because it is the immediate cause of direct realization. Thus, while meditation is the best of all means, the renunciation of the fruits of action performed by an ignorant person is praised as being even superior to that—'Dhyanat' etc. Renunciation of the fruits of action is superior to meditation is the connection. From the renunciation of the fruits of all actions performed by a person of controlled mind, peace, which is the cessation of the transmigratory existence with its cause, follows immediately; it does not await another time. Here, in Upanishadic passages like 'When all desires clinging to one's heart fall off, then the mortal becomes immortal and attains Brahman here,' and in the characteristics of the sthitaprajna like 'When he renounces all desires...', the renunciation of all desires is included as the means to immortality. The fruits of actions are indeed desires, and their renunciation, sharing the common feature of 'renunciation of desires', is praised with the fruit of the renunciation of all desires. Just as it is said that the sea was drunk by the Brahmana Agastya, or the earth was made devoid of Kshatriyas twenty-one times by the Brahmana Parashurama, and due to the common feature of Brahminhood, the Brahmanas of the present day are also praised as possessing immeasurable prowess, in the same way (this renunciation is praised).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He praises this renunciation of fruits—'Sreyo hi' etc. Knowledge accompanied by instruction with reasoning is superior to practice devoid of right knowledge. Meditation accompanied by that (knowledge) is superior even to that. For there is the Upanishadic text: 'Then, meditating, he beholds Him who is without parts.' Renunciation of the fruits of actions, as described, is superior even to that. From such renunciation of the fruits of action, due to the cessation of attachment to actions and their fruits, and by My grace, the peace of transmigratory existence follows immediately.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Now, for the sake of its compulsory performance, he praises the renunciation of the fruits of all actions—'Sreyo hi' etc. Knowledge, which is conviction of the Self through scriptures and reasoning, is superior to the practice of listening for the sake of knowledge preceded by discrimination. Meditation, which is preceded by knowledge but devoid of nididhyasana (constant contemplation), is superior to that knowledge. Renunciation of the fruits of action is superior even to meditation. Alternatively, indirect knowledge born of listening and reflection is superior to practice which is nididhyasana. Meditation, which is listening and chanting of Vishnu, is superior even to knowledge. Renunciation of the fruits of action is superior even to that. But this alternative view is not preferred. The reason for its non-preference is the well-known superiority of nididhyasana over indirect knowledge. Thus, for a self-controlled person who has resorted to My yoga, from the renunciation of the fruits of all actions, peace, which is the cessation of the transmigratory existence with its cause, follows immediately; it does not await another time. Objection: But does this not contradict the well-known statements of scriptures and Smritis like 'the knower of the Self crosses sorrow', 'knowing Him alone one goes beyond death, there is no other path for liberation', 'liberation comes from knowledge alone', 'without knowledge there is no liberation', 'only by knowing the Deity is there an end to misery', 'indeed there is no purifier here equal to knowledge', and 'having attained knowledge one quickly goes to supreme peace'? Reply: No, because the present statement is meant as an eulogy. Among the practices like worship of the Imperishable, since the latter is prescribed when one is unable to practice the former, and the instruction culminates in renunciation, the renunciation of the fruits of all actions is prescribed and praised for one who is engaged in works but is unable to perform the previously mentioned practices, in order to induce them to perform it. In passages like 'When all desires clinging to one's heart fall off, then the mortal becomes immortal and attains Brahman here', and 'When he renounces all desires of the mind, satisfied in the self by the self, then he is called a sthitaprajna', it is stated that peace follows immediately after the renunciation of all desires (fruits of all actions) by a wise man steadfast in meditation. Therefore, because the ignorant person's renunciation of the fruits of all actions shares the common feature of 'renouncing all desires', this praise of renunciation of the fruits of actions is meant to generate interest. Just as it is said that the sea was drunk by the Brahmana Agastya, or the earth was made devoid of Kshatriyas twenty-one times by the Brahmana Parashurama, and due to the common feature of Brahminhood, the Brahmanas of the present day are also praised.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Now, in order to remove the grief caused by the lack of qualification for the direct means, and to prevent attempts at impossible tasks like a child stretching out its hands to catch the moon, he praises the indirect means according to capability, emphasizing their ease, and establishes what has been said—'Sreyo hi' etc. To speak of the superiority of the means of practice from its actual nature is inappropriate because of the opposite reason. Therefore, the practice of contemplation performed by one who is unqualified is indeed tasteless, like a child squeezing an unripe fruit with the desire for ripe fruit juice. In comparison to that, the superiority of the means of sweet practice as it is, is indeed appropriate; with this intention, the phrase 'devoid of extreme love' is spoken. And its difficulty for one whose sins are not destroyed is called 'difficult' like drinking milk when affected by bile. Here, the knowledge enjoined as a means to the practice of the Supreme Self is indeed appropriate to be in reference to the individual self. And since it is intended to be of the nature of direct realization because of being achievable through meditation, it is said: 'direct knowledge of the self arising from the contemplation of the imperishable self'. The words 'sreyah' (superior) and 'visisyate' (excels) are explained as 'conductive to well-being' to show they have the same meaning. The 'well-being' of the indirect means here refers to its extreme ease, not to its superiority in terms of being primary. The meaning of 'imperfect' is also the same as before. The action performed by one who has renounced fruits has the intermediate function of producing peace in the form of cessation of attraction-aversion born of Rajas and Tamas, and this is stated as 'by the destruction of sins'. Objection: Here also, under 'peace follows renunciation', it is appropriate to prescribe superiority as before, otherwise the flow of style would be broken; and since meditation is to be achieved by actions, it is inappropriate to state the superiority of something else achieved by actions, and how can there be superiority when there is a delay in peace? Reply: To this, he says—'When the mind is at peace...'. The intention is: by the instruction 'immediately', the change of style is indicated as obvious. And since whatever is seen immediately after something else is clearly its effect, and since peace is the cause of meditation, and meditation is achieved by actions, it is in accordance with the intended superiority of actions. Here, in the statement 'peace immediately follows renunciation', the cause-effect relationship is also intended for meditation, etc., and to indicate this, he says 'from meditation results...' etc. Objection: Why is it not accepted that knowledge, etc. are progressively closer to the self and therefore superior, taking 'Sreyo hi jnanam abhyasat' in its literal sense? Declaring the summary of the meaning, he concludes the superiority of the indirect discipline—'Thus for one incapable of practicing loving devotion...'. The intention is: 'If you are unable to fix your mind' (12.9) is the beginning. And by 'If you are unable to do even this' (12.11), for one incapable of even the seed of Bhakti Yoga, the renunciation of fruits of actions is prescribed, and that is recognized here in 'renunciation of fruits of action is superior to meditation'. Therefore, its application to one who is incapable in comparison to practice being established, the two intermediate ones (knowledge and meditation), appearing between practice and actions, are proved to be applicable to different qualified persons according to their respective incapacities.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He explains the nature of the duties mentioned progressively—'Sreyo' etc. Knowledge is superior to mere practice, which is remembrance of the Lord by force of drawing the mind. Therefore, practice combined with knowledge is supreme, this is the idea. Meditation, which is contemplation on My form, is superior to mere knowledge. Therefore, meditation combined with knowledge and practice is supreme, this is the idea. The renunciation of the fruits of action is superior to mere meditation. Therefore, performing My actions for My sake combined with knowledge, practice, and meditation is supreme, this is the idea. Because it is so, immediately after such renunciation, peace, which is establishment in devotion to Me, ensues.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He praises this very renunciation as it is the root of all human goals—'Sreyo hi' etc. Indirect knowledge born of listening and reflection is superior to practice which is nididhyasana (constant contemplation). Meditation, which is listening and chanting of Vishnu, is superior even to knowledge. Renunciation of the fruits of action is superior even to that. Because immediately after that, without any gap, there is peace which is liberation, through the purification of the mind. Here, the external means is called superior in comparison to the preceding ones because of its ease, in order to increase inclination towards it. Alternatively, knowledge which is of the nature of conviction of truth is superior to the practice of listening etc. For the sake of direct realization of the known object, meditation is superior to that. Renunciation of the fruits of action is superior even to that. Indeed, a yogi is said to be one who renounces all actions as in 'when he renounces all desires'. This person also, by the renunciation of the fruits of action, surely renounces desires, and is therefore praised as equal to him.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the cultivation of knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, is meditation, and better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits of action, for by such renunciation one can attain peace of mind.

 As mentioned in the previous verses, there are two kinds of devotional service: the way of regulative principles and the way of full attachment in love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those who are actually not able to follow the principles of Kṛṣṇa consciousness it is better to cultivate knowledge, because by knowledge one can be able to understand his real position. Gradually knowledge will develop to the point of meditation. By meditation one can be able to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by a gradual process. In the cultivation of knowledge there are processes which make one understand that one himself is the Supreme, and that sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable to engage in devotional service. If one is not able to meditate in such a way, then there are prescribed duties, as enjoined in the Vedic literature, for the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras, which we shall find in the last chapter of Bhagavad-gītā . But in all cases, one should give up the result or fruits of labor; this means to employ the result of karma for some good cause. In summary, to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the highest goal, there are two processes: one process is by gradual development, and the other process is direct. Devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the direct method, and the other method involves renouncing the fruits of one’s activities. Then one can come to the stage of knowledge, then to the stage of meditation, then to the stage of understanding the Supersoul, and then to the stage of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One may take either the step-by-step process or the direct path. The direct process is not possible for everyone; therefore the indirect process is also good. It is, however, to be understood that the indirect process is not recommended for Arjuna, because he is already at the stage of loving devotional service to the Supreme Lord. It is for others, who are not at this stage; for them the gradual process of renunciation, knowledge, meditation and realization of the Supersoul and Brahman should be followed. But as far as Bhagavad-gītā is concerned, it is the direct method that is stressed. Everyone is advised to take to the direct method and surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.