Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
tānahaṃ dviṣataḥ krurānsaṃsāreṣu narādhamān .
kṣipāmyajasramaśubhānāsurīṣveva yoniṣu

Word Meanings:
तान् - those
अहम् - I
द्विषतः - hating
क्रूरान् - cruel
संसारेषु - in the worlds
नराधमान् - worst among men
क्षिपामि - hurl
अजस्रम् - for ever
अशुभान् - evildoers
आसुरीषु - of demons
एव - only
योनिषु - in wombs.

Life Application:
These hateful, cruel, lowest of men I hurl perpetually into demonic wombs in the cycle of birth and death.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
These cruel haters, worst among men in the world, I hurl those evil-doers into the wombs of demons only.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Those cruel haters, worst among men in the world, I hurl those evil-doers into the wombs of demons only.

तान् those? अहम् I? द्विषतः (the) hating (ones)? क्रूरान् cruel? संसारेषु in the worlds? नराधमान् worst among men? क्षिपामि (I) hurl? अजस्रम् for ever? अशुभान् evildoers? आसुरीषु of demons? एव only? योनिषु in wombs.Commentary Now listen to the manner in which I deal with all these demoniacal persons who injure people and who take delight in killing people and animals and who hate Me? the indweller of all bodies. I deprive them of their human state and reduce them to a lower condition as subhuman creatures. I hurl them into the wombs of the most cruel beings such as tigers? lions? scorpions? snakes and the like. For ever only means till they purify their hearts. There is no such thing as eternal damnation.Tan Those The enemies of those who tread the path of righteousness and the haters of virtuous persons.Naradhaman Worst among men because they are guilty of the wors evil deeds and they take delight in injuring virtuous persns and in killing persons and animals ruthlessly.Asurishu yonishu Wombs of Asuras Wombs of the most cruel beings such as tigers? lions and the like.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Those who thus hate Me, who are cruel, the dregs of mankind, I condemn them to a continuous, miserable and godless rebirth.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
I cast for ever those hateful, cruel, evil-doers in the worlds, the vilest of human beings, verily into the demoniacal classes.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that Sri Krishna speaks here as the Lord of Karma who metes out justice. There is no personal bias or hatred in God. Just as a judge sentencing a criminal is not biased but merely executes the law, the moral law of the universe naturally guides souls to environments suitable to their mental temperament. Those who cultivate animalistic tendencies, anger, and hatred are naturally cast into lower subhuman species where they can exhaust their dense animalistic Vasanas.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
These hateful, cruel, basest men,  I  hurl incessantly into the inauspicious demoniac wombs alone in the cycle of birth-and-death.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Those haters, cruel, the vilest and the most inauspicious of mankind, I hurl forever into the cycles of births and deaths, into the wombs of demons.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
I cast for ever those hateful, cruel, evil-doers in the worlds, the vilest of human beings, verily into the demoniacla classes.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that casting them into lower species is not God's cruelty, but rather the result of their own unrighteous deeds. God acts as the impartial giver of the fruits of actions according to cosmic law.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Those haters, cruel, worst among men in the world, and evil-doers, I perpetually cast into the demoniac wombs only.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that those Asuri people who live by harming others are called the worst among men (naradhama). Since they act worse than animals in human form, their human birth is taken away. By hurling them into animal forms like snakes, scorpions, and tigers, God acts like a loving teacher who punishes students to correct them. It is God's grace to exhaust their sins in these lower bodies so that they can eventually be purified and liberated.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Those who hate Me in this manner, I hurl them, the cruel, inauspicious and the vilest of mankind into the cycle of births and deaths for ever, viz., old age, death etc., revolving again and again, and even there into demoniac wombs. I hurl them into births, antagonistic to any friendliness towards Me. The meaning is that I shall connect them to cruel minds as would impel them to actions which lead them to the attainment of cursed births.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.17–16.20 jointly): Atmasambhavitah etc. upto gatim.  They pretend to perform sacrifices :  The meaning is that their sacrifice is fruitless.  Indeed all is ruined because of their anger.  Or, namayjna  [may mean]  'the sacrifices which are in name only'.  Or, it [may denote] those sacrifices that are performed for one's name sake i.e., for one's reputation, because of which one gets the appellation as  'He is performer  of [such and such]  sacrifices'  These sacrifices, performed out of hypocricy alone, do not , however fetch any fruit.  Becasue these persons are rugged with anger etc., they hate people and by that they hate Me only [in fact]. For, I, the Vasudeva (the Universal Soul), dwell every-where.  Entertaining hatred towards their  own Soul, they perform action, that is hostile to themselves, and responsible for their own fall into the hells.  These persons I hurl into nothing but the demoniac wombs.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Because of their defect of unrighteousness, aham, I; ksipami, cast, hurl; ajasram, for ever; all tan, those; who are dvisatah, hateful of Me; kruran, cruel; and asubhan, who are evil doers; samsaresu, in the worlds-who are on the paths leading to hell; who are the nara-adhaman, vilest of human beings, who are opposed to the right path, who are hostile to the pious people; eva, verily; asurisu, into the demoniacal; yonisu, classes-tigers, loins, etc., which are full of evil deeds. The verb cast is to be connected with 'into the classes'.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that the Lord casts these natural demons and deceivers repeatedly into demoniac wombs because of their hostility towards the Supreme Person.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that there is no bias or lack of compassion in God, for He acts according to scriptural statements where those of corrupt actions quickly attain corrupt species like dogs or hogs. It is their own ancient conditioning that compels their present actions and results.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that they can never escape their demoniac nature. The Lord casts them forever into the cycles of birth and death, particularly into very cruel animal species like tigers, to suffer the fruits of their sins.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that as the lord of justice, God hurls these evil-doers who hate Him and holy men into demoniac wombs like tigers. This is the only way to purify them by exhausting their severe sins.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the four classes of evil-doers are cast into demoniac cycles of birth, which are completely opposite to spiritual growth. By giving them cruel minds, they are connected to actions that lead to further cursed births.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that as the dispenser of all fruits, God casts His haters into demoniac species. The word 'ksipami' (I cast) shows the Lord's righteous anger towards their sinful acts.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that God is the Indweller of all; therefore, casting them into lower species is not partiality. Their own past conditioning drives them to commit sins, and they simply receive the matching results.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, I perpetually cast into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life.

 In this verse it is clearly indicated that the placing of a particular individual soul in a particular body is the prerogative of the supreme will. The demoniac person may not agree to accept the supremacy of the Lord, and it is a fact that he may act according to his own whims, but his next birth will depend upon the decision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and not on himself. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , Third Canto, it is stated that an individual soul, after his death, is put into the womb of a mother where he gets a particular type of body under the supervision of superior power. Therefore in the material existence we find so many species of life – animals, insects, men, and so on. All are arranged by the superior power. They are not accidental. As for the demoniac, it is clearly said here that they are perpetually put into the wombs of demons, and thus they continue to be envious, the lowest of mankind. Such demoniac species of men are held to be always full of lust, always violent and hateful and always unclean. The many kinds of hunters in the jungle are considered to belong to the demoniac species of life.