Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
karṣayantaḥ śarīrasthaṃ bhūtagrāmamacetasaḥ .
māṃ caivāntaḥśarīrasthaṃ tānviddhyāsuraniścayān

Word Meanings:
कर्षयन्तः - torturing
शरीरस्थम् - dwelling in the body
भूतग्रामम् - all the elements
अचेतसः - senseless
माम् - Me
च - and
एव - even
अन्तःशरीरस्थम् - dwelling within the body
तान् - them
विद्धि - know
आसुरनिश्चयान् - holding demoniac resolves

Life Application:
Senselessly torturing elements in the body and God dwelling within—know them to be of demonic resolves.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Senselessly torturing the elements composing their physical bodies, and Me also who dwell within the body—know them to be of demonic resolve.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Senseless, torturing all the elements in the body and Me also, Who dwell in the body,  know thou these to be of demonical resolves.

कर्षयन्तः torturing? शरीरस्थम् dwelling in the body? भूतग्रामम् all the elements? अचेतसः senseless? माम् Me? च and? एव even? अन्तःशरीरस्थम् who dwells in the body within? तान् them? विद्धि know? आसुरनिश्चयान् to be of demoniac resolves.Commentary Bhutagramam The aggregate of all the elements composing the body.Elements Organs.Mam Me Vaasudeva? the witness of their thoughts and deeds.He who thus tortures Me disregards My teachings entirely.Achetasah Senseless? unintelligent? having no discrimination.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
They are ignorant. They torment the organs of the body; and they harass Me also, Who lives within. Know that they are devoted to evil.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Too much enthusiasm without discrimination only brings physical fatigue and mental depression. Spiritual growth cannot be achieved by non-scriptural, foolish practices. श्रीकृष्ण ridicules these non-discriminating seekers who torture themselves. While scriptures recommend controlled austerities to overcome body-consciousness, they must be done with wisdom and under scriptural guidance. Self-torture out of vanity and ego, or driven by attachment and lust, only harms the individual. Even if they gain some power, they misuse it. They distress the inner divine self (the Lord) within them by refusing to let the divine consciousness shine in its full glory and beauty. True Tapas is wise self-control, not brutal physical self-torture.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Who emaciate unintelligently the conglamoration of elements in their physic and emaciate Me too, dwelling within the physic-know them to be of a demoniac resolve.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
These foolish men, torturing the group of elements in their bodies and Me also who dwell within the body - know them to be demoniacal in their resolves.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
(And who,) being non-discriminating, torture, all the organs in the body as also even Me who reside in the body,-know them as possessed of demoniacal conviction.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that 'tormenting the Lord' means having a deficient or distorted vision of Him. One who does not see the Great Supreme Person as He is, but devalues Him, is a tormentor and a sinner. Demonic resolve is the determination of demons.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains how the witness consciousness, the Lord residing in the body, can be said to be tormented. Tormenting the Lord means violating His commandments (as laid down in the scriptures). Understanding their demonic nature helps one to avoid such associations.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Those men who perform severe austerities not ordained by the scriptures, given to hypocrisy and egotism, impelled by the force of lust, attachment, and stubbornness; senselessly torturing the elements in their physical bodies, and Me also who dwell within the body—know them to be of demonic resolves.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that those of demonic nature perform terrible self-willed austerities that violate scriptural injunctions. They are full of hypocrisy (pretending to be spiritual) and egotism (pride in their own knowledge and strength). Driven by attachment to worldly objects and stubborn determination, they torture the elements of the physical body. Moreover, by disobeying divine laws and acting out of delusion, they torment the Lord dwelling within as the inner witness. Ramsukhdas contrasts this with scriptural tapasyas (of body, speech, and mind) which are performed peacefully without self-torture.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Those men who perform terrible pernances not enjoined by the Sastras' - this is illustrative of sacrifices etc., of a similar nature. Those who perform sacrifices, etc., sacrifices which are not enjoined by the Sastras and demand much exertion, those who are possessed of 'ostentation and conceit and are goaded by sensual desire, attachment and passion' - they torture the group of elements such as earth etc., in their bodies. They also torture the individual self which is a part of Myself and is within their bodies. Those who perform such sacrifices etc., know them to be demoniacal in their resolves. The resolve of demons is demoniac resolve. The demons are those who act contrary to My ?ndments. Since they act contrary to My ?ndments, they do not have even a iota of joy, but as stated earlier, they fall a prey to a multitude of calamities. 'They fall into a foul Naraka' (16.16).

Now, Sri Krsna, resuming the subject, details the differences according to the Gunas with reference to sacrifice, etc., enjoined by the Sastras. To begin with, he describes three kinds of food, since the growth of Sattva etc., has its source in food, as Srutis declare thus:  'For my dear, the mind consists of food' (Cha. U., 6.5.4) and 'when the food is pure, the man becomes pure' (Cha. U., 7.26.2).

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta explains that these verses describe the demonic determination. Those who perform self-willed penances not ordained by the scriptures are senseless (because they lack discrimination) and torment both the body and the indwelling Lord. Hence, they are Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
(And who,) acetasah, being non-discriminating; karsayantah, torture; bhuta-gramam, all the organs; sarirastham, in the body, ca, as also; torture eva, even; mam, Me; antah-sarira-stham, who reside in the body as the witness of its actions and intellect-non-adherence to My injunctions itself is 'torturing Me'; viddhi, know; tan, them; asura-niscayan, as possessed of demoniacal convictions. Know them so that they may be avoided. This is an instruction.
The liking of persons possessing the alities of sattva, rajas and tamas for foods that are divided into three groups, viz succulent, oleaginous, etc., is respectively being shown here so that, by knowing the presence of the alities of sattva, rajas and tamas (in oneself) from the indications of the degree of one's preference for particular foods as are succulent, oleaginous, etc., one may avoid foods having the characteristics of rajas and tamas, and accept food with the characteristics of sattva. Similarly, sacrifices etc. also are being explained here under three categories according to the distinguishing ality of sattva etc. So that one may reject those known to be born of rajas and tamas, and undertake only those born of sattva.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that those who discard scriptural injunctions and perform severe austerities driven solely by their own desires are of demonic resolve. Such self-willed practices cause useless torment to the physical elements and the Lord residing within.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that those who reject the scriptures and practice non-scriptural, painful austerities driven by hypocrisy and pride are of demonic resolve. Endured by the force of desire and attachment, they torture the elements of the physical body. By violating the Lord's commandments, they also torment the Lord who resides as the inner witness of their intellect. Although they appear human, their actions are demonic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that those who are extremely unfortunate and follow heretical paths practice non-scriptural, terrifying austerities. Prompted by hypocrisy, egotism, lust, attachment, and stubborn pride, they torture the elements of their body and the Lord residing within. Know them to be of demonic determination, as they act contrary to scriptural wisdom.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that practicing non-scriptural and painful austerities out of hypocrisy, egotism, and lust is a characteristic of those with demonic determination. They dry up the physical elements and disobey the Supreme Lord dwelling within.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the Lord describes the characteristics of non-scriptural austerities to contrast them with scriptural ones. Those who perform severe penances out of hypocrisy and pride, driven by desire and attachment, torture the elemental body and the individual soul (which belongs to the Lord). Such acts are demoniacal (Asura) because they oppose the Lord's commandments (Sastra).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that these senseless people torture the physical body and components which are meant for the Lord's play, and torment the Lord who resides as the inner guide. Know them to be of demonic resolve, meaning they oppose the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'torturing Me also' means tormenting the Lord who resides in the body as the enjoyer (Bhokta) and witness (Sakshi), by torturing the body and violating His scriptural commandments. Know them to be of demonic resolve.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Tormenting the elements in the body and Me residing there, and engaged in acts of folly, know them to be of demoniac resolve.

 There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penance which are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting for some ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end, is not mentioned in the scriptural directions. The scriptures recommend fasting for spiritual advancement, not for some political end or social purpose. Persons who take to such austerities are, according to Bhagavad-gītā , certainly demoniac. Their acts are against the scriptural injunctions and are not beneficial for the people in general. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust and attachment for material enjoyment. By such activities, not only is the combination of material elements of which the body is constructed disturbed, but also the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself living within the body. Such unauthorized fasting or austerities for some political end are certainly very disturbing to others. They are not mentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person may think that he can force his enemy or other parties to comply with his desire by this method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are not approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that those who engage in them are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to the Supreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience to the Vedic scriptural injunctions. The word acetasaḥ is significant in this connection. Persons of normal mental condition must obey the scriptural injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglect and disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own way of austerities and penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of the demoniac people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forces them to take birth in the wombs of demoniac persons. Consequently they will live by demoniac principles life after life without knowing their relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, such persons are fortunate enough to be guided by a spiritual master who can direct them to the path of Vedic wisdom, they can get out of this entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.