Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
dhṛtyā yayā dhārayate manaḥprāṇendriyakriyāḥ .
yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī

Word Meanings:
धृत्या - by firmness
यया - which
धारयते - holds
मनःप्राणेन्द्रियक्रियाः - functions of mind, breath, and senses
योगेन - by Yoga
अव्यभिचारिण्या - unswerving
धृतिः - firmness
सा - that
पार्थ - O Arjuna
सात्त्विकी - Sattvic .

Life Application:
Fortitude by which functions of mind, breath, and senses are held through unswerving yoga—is Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The unwavering firmness by which, through Yoga, the functions of the mind, the life-force and the senses are restrained, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The unwavering firmness by which, through Yoga, the functions of the mind, the life-force and the senses are restrained  that firmness, O Arjuna, is Sattvic (pure).

धृत्या by firmness? यया (by) which? धारयते holds? मनःप्राणेन्द्रियक्रियाः the functions of the mind? the Prana and the senses? योगेन by Yoga? अव्यभिचारिण्या unswerving? धृतिः firmness? सा that? पार्थ O Arjuna? सात्त्विकी Sattvic (pure).Commentary When firmness is awakened in the mind? the activities of the mind? the lifeforce and the senses are brought under control. The senses are withdrawn into the mind. The Prana and the Apana pass into the Sushumna Nadi.Yoga Samadhi or concentration of the mind. You cannot restrain the mind? the lifeforce and the senses by mere firmness. You can control them only by firmness which is ever accompanied by concentration of the mind.When the mind? the lifeforce and the senses are curbed by unwarvering firmness? they cannot run towards external sensual objects? they cannot do any mischief? they cannot move in ways which are opposed to the scriptures? they will be absorbed into their respective causes and their outgoing tendencies will be totally checked.This firmness is not repression or suppression? but an intelligent sublimation and inner transformation.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The conviction and steady concentration by which the mind, the vitality and the senses are controlled - O Arjuna! They are the product of Purity.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Dhrti is the inner capacity of determination that keeps our chosen goal in sight and provides persistence to face mountain-like obstacles. It organizes hidden resources of courage and resolve. The Sattvic determination is that by which a seeker controls the mind, the senses, and their activities through yoga (contemplation on the Self) and goal-focus. Senses are naturally outgoing, and only the mind can control them, which requires a noble and high goal. Through contemplation on the Self, the seeker attains stability, peace, and containment, enabling sense-control.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The unfailing content because of which one restrains, with  Yoga, the activities of  mind, the living breath and the senses-that content is considered to be of the Sattva (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That Dhrti (fortitude or persisting perseverance) by which one maintains the unswerving activities of the mind and vital force and these sense-organs through Yoga - that Dhrti is of the nature of Sattva.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Partha, the firmness that is unfailing through concentration, with which one restrains the functions of the mind, vital forces and the organs, that firmness is born of sattva.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The Lord defines the Sattvic determination (Dhrti). It is characterized by unwavering concentration (Yoga), which restrains the activities of the mind, vital breaths, and senses from going against scriptures, keeping them focused on Brahman.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Partha, that unwavering determination by which one controls the activities of the mind, vital breaths, and senses through Yoga (equanimity), is Sattvic.

Commentary: 'Yoga' here refers to equanimity in joy and sorrow, success and failure. 'Avyabhicarini' means wanting only the Divine without any desire for material rewards in this world or the next. The inner power of keeping one's resolve firm is Dhrti. Control of mind means directing thoughts at will; control of Prana means breathing according to scriptural yogic rules; control of senses means keeping them away from unregulated indulgence. Such mastery over mind, breath, and senses is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
That Dhrti by which one through unswerving Yoga sustains the activities of the mind and the vital force and the sense-organs is said to be of the nature of Sattva. 'Yoga is worship of the Lord which forms the means for release. The meaning is that the Dhrti or fortitude by means of which one sustains the activities of the mind and other organs in the practice of Yoga (worship) until one's object is accomplished, is of the nature of Sattva.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.33–18.35 jointly): The Tamasic determination is that by which a person fixes his pleasure solely in sleep, disputes, and laziness.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O Partha, dhrtya, the firmness; (-is connected with the remote word) avyabhicarinya, that is unfailing; yogena, through concentration, i.e. (the firmness that is) ever associated with samadhi (absorption in Brahman); yaya, with which; dharayate, one restrains;-what?-manah-prana-indriya-kriyah, the functions of the mind, vital forces and organs-restrains them from tending towards the path opposed to the scriptures-. Indeed, when restrained with firmness, they do not incline towards objects prohibited by the scriptures. Sa, that; dhrtih, firmness, which is of this kind; is sattviki, born of sattva.
What is mean is that when one restrains the functions of the mind, vital forces and organs with unfailing firmness, one does so through yoga, concentration.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The fortitude by which one endures the difficulties of the path of Yoga (leading to liberation) and restrains the body, mind, and senses, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The fortitude (resolve) which is invariably associated with samadhi (meditative absorption) and by which one restrains the activities of the mind, vital breaths, and senses from prohibited paths, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The determination by which one controls the activities of the mind, vital force, and senses through concentration, not allowing them to wander toward other objects, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The determination which is always associated with meditation on Brahman and by which one restrains the activities of the mind, vital force, and senses, preventing them from forbidden paths, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Unlike Rajasic determination which seeks material ends, Sattvic determination is focused solely on worship of the Divine for liberation (Yoga). It controls prana (breath-control), mana (inner contemplation), and senses (withdrawing them from objects).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The determination which is free from desires for other objects (unswerving) and restrains the mind from wandering, the prana from hunger-instincts, and the senses from sense-pleasures, keeping them focused on the Lord, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The determination which is associated with meditation (samadhi) and restrains the mind (thoughts), prana (breathing), and senses (perception) to keep them in a state of absorption (concentration), is Sattvic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O son of Pṛthā, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained with steadfastness by yoga practice, and which thus controls the activities of the mind, life and senses is determination in the mode of goodness.

 Yoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily fixed in the Supreme Soul with determination, concentrating one’s mind, life and sensory activities on the Supreme, engages in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That sort of determination is in the mode of goodness. The word avyabhicāriṇyā is very significant, for it indicates that persons who are engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are never deviated by any other activity.