Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
kāryakāraṇakartṛtve hetuḥ prakṛtirucyate .
puruṣaḥ sukhaduḥkhānāṃ bhoktṛtve heturucyate

Word Meanings:
कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे - in the origin of cause and effect
हेतुः - the cause
प्रकृतिः - Prakriti
उच्यते - is said
पुरुषः - Purusha
सुखदुःखानाम् - of pleasure and pain
भोक्तृत्वे - in the experience
हेतुः - the cause
उच्यते - is said .
कारण - ) which means cause
करण - ) which means instrument

Life Application:
Understand nature as the cause of body and senses, and spirit as the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Nature is said to be the cause in the generation of the effect (body) and the cause (instruments), and the Purusha is said to be the cause in the experience of pleasure and pain.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
In the production of the effect and the cause, Nature (matter) is said to be the cause; in the experience of pleasure and pain, the soul is said to be the cause.

कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे in the production of the effect? and the cause? हेतुः the cause? प्रकृतिः Prakriti? उच्यते is said (to be)? पुरुषः Purusha? सुखदुःखानाम् of pleasure and pain? भोक्तृत्वे in the experience? हेतुः the cause? उच्यते is said (to be).Commentary Pleasure and pain are the fruits of virtuous and vicious actions. The force of desire acts on the mind and the mind impels the senses to act to get the objects of desire. Good and evil actions proceed from Nature and lead to happiness or misery. Evil actions produce misery and sorrow. Virtuous actions cause happiness and joy. The soul is the enjoyer. The wife works and prepares nice? palatable dishes the huand silently enjoys the fruits of her labour. He sits ietly and eats them to his hearts content. Even so Nature works and the soul experiences the fruits of Her labour? viz.? pleasure and pain.When harmony predominates? virtuous actions are performed. When there is a preponderance of Rajas? both virtuous and vicious actions are performed. When Tamas predominates? sinful? unlawful and unrighteous actions are done.In the place of Kaarana (कारण) which means cause? some read Karana (करण) which means instrument such as the five organs of knowledge? five organs of action? mind? intellect and egoism (thirteen principles located in the body).Karya The effect? viz.? the physical body. The five elements which form the body and the five senses? and which form the senseobjects which are born of Nature come under the term effect. All alities? such as pleasure and pain and delusion which are born of Nature? come under the term instruments because these alities reside in the instruments? the senses.In the production of the body? the senses and their sensations Nature is said to be the cause. Thus Nature is the cause of Samsara.Sugarcane is the cause. Sugarcane juice? sugar and sugarcandy are the effects or modifications of sugarcane. Milk is the cause. Curd? butter and ghee (meleted butter) are the modifications of milk. Whatever is a modification of something is its effect? and that from which the modifications come is their cause. Nature is the source or cause of all modifications. She generates everything. The ten organs? mind and the five objects of the senses are the sixteen modifications or effects.Mahat (intellect) is born of Mulaprakriti. From Mahat Ahamkara (egoism) is born. Mahat is the effect of Mulaprakriti and the cause of Ahamkara. Therefore Mahat is called PrakritiVikriti. Mahat? Ahamkara and the five Tanmatras (rootelements of matter) are the seven PrakritiVikriti. Each of these is a modification of its predecessor and is in turn the cause of its successor. The five rootelements generate the five gross elements. They are the subtle elements. These seven are both Nature and modification (Prakriti and Vikriti)? cause and effect? and are included under the term cause.The functions of the body? senses? lifeforce? mind and intellect are superimposed on the pure Self. So the ignorant man says I am black I am fat I am hungry I am angry I am deaf I am blind I am the son of so and so? I know? I am the doer? I am the enjoyer? etc.The intellect is very subtle. It is in close contact with the most subtle Self. The Consciousness of the Self is reflected in the intellect (Chidabhasa) and so the intellect which has the semblance of,the Consciousness feels I am pure consciousness or Chaitanya. I experience pleasure and pain. The attributes of the pure Self are superimposed on the intellect. There is mutual superimposition between the intellect and the Self? Nature and Spirit. This is the cause of Samsara.Purusha? Jiva? Kshetrajna and Bhokta are all synonymous terms. Purusha here referred to is not the Supreme Self. He is the conditioned soul? the soul subject to transmigration who experiences pleasure and pain. The Self or the Absolute is ever free from Samsara and is unchanging.Prakriti and Purusha are the cause of Samsara. Nature generates the body? lifeforce? mind? intellect and the senses. The soul experiences pleasure and pain. Samsara is the experience of pleasure and pain. The soul is the Samsarin. He is the experiencer of pleasure and pain. (Cf.XV.9)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Nature is the Law which generates cause and effect; God is the source of the enjoyment of all pleasure and pain.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Nature is the cause in the generation of the effect (body) and the cause (instruments). Here, the word 'karya' (effect) refers to these thirteen elements—the five great elements, the five organs of perception, mind, intellect, and egoism. The five objects of the senses, viz., sound, touch, form, taste, and smell, are represented in the individual as the five organs of perception, as discussed earlier. The five senses receive different objects, and to assemble them is the function of the mind. Thereafter, to react, an element is required which, understanding the nature of the perceived object, decides the response; and that element is the intellect. Now, in all these activities—perception, assembly, and decision—an ego-sense remains constant, such as 'I see', 'I decide', etc. This ego-sense is called egoism (Ahamkara), which arises due to the identification of the Self with these limiting adjuncts (Upadhis) like the senses. These thirteen elements are indicated here by the word 'karya'. This entire world of effects is manifest, and its unmanifest state is called the cause. These effects and causes are indeed Prakriti. The Purusha is the experiencer of pleasure and pain. The conscious element that illumines this Prakriti in the form of cause and effect is the Self or Purusha. Here, the Self is called the experiencer of pleasure and pain in the form of Purusha; this is its conditional (UPADHI) state, not the real one. Pleasure and pain are reactions of our mind. In favorable circumstances, when the desired is attained, pleasure arises, and when the undesired is attained, pain arises. In the final analysis, every experience is determined as either pleasure or pain. Consciousness alone illumines all these experiences, without which this life in the form of a stream of experiences is not possible. Therefore, it is said here that Purusha is the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain. The Self acting as the Knower of the Field (Kshetrajna) in the conditioning of the Field (Kshetra) becomes the experiencer of the world. A person standing in the scorching sun must bear the heat of the sun; if that person moves into dense shade, he experiences the bliss of coolness. In this verse, Purusha is said to be the experiencer of the world in the form of pleasure and pain. What is the cause of this world? In reply, the Lord says—

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
In creating  [the process of]  cause-and-effect, the Material Cause is said to be the basis; and in experiencing pleasure and pain, the Soul is said to be the basis.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Prakrti is said to be the cause of agency to the body (Karya) and sense-organs (Karana). The self is said to be the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
With regard to the source of body and organs, Nature is said to be the cause. The soul is the cause so far as enjoyership of happiness and sorrow is concerned.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Karya' (effect) is the body; indeed, the body is designated as 'Karya'. 'Karana' (instruments) are the senses. 'Bhoga' (enjoyment) is experience; for he (the Purusha), being of the nature of consciousness, experiences. Prakriti, being insentient, is subject to transformation. 'They know Prakriti to be the cause in the agency of cause and effect, and Purusha, who is beyond Prakriti, to be the cause in the experience of pleasure and pain'—thus in the Bhagavata (3.26.8).

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Anandagiri introduces the next verse in the form of a question and answer with 'yat'. In order to state the cause, he first mentions the worldly existence of this soul due to the superimposition of identity with ignorance, saying 'purusha'. The construction is: because he has identified Prakriti with the Self, therefore he experiences. He depicts the enjoyment of the objects of the qualities by saying 'happy' etc. Anticipating the objection that since ignorance is the cause of experience, what is the need to search for another cause, he says 'satyampyeti...' (though it is true...). He cites the authority for attachment being the primary cause of rebirth in the world, with 'sa yatha...'. Having introduced the second half of the verse in support of the stated meaning, he explains it beginning with 'tad etat...'. Or he states another interpretation involving ellipsis with 'athava...'. Distinguishing the good and evil births, he explains them with 'sad-yonayah...'. By mentioning the two types of births, the intermediate human births are also implied, hence he says 'samarthyad...'. Fearing the objection that if attachment is the cause of worldly existence, ignorance cannot be the cause, since a single cause is sufficient, he says 'etat...'. The meaning is that ignorance is the material cause and attachment is the efficient cause, so both are proved to be the cause. He states the intended result of declaring this twofold cause, with 'tac cha...'. Fearing that since ignorance accompanied by attachment does not cease of its own accord, its destroyer must be stated, he says 'asya...'. The meaning is that renunciation upon the rise of dispassion, followed by knowledge, is the remover of ignorance accompanied by attachment. He gives the authority for the stated knowledge, with 'gita...'. He says that the knowledge mentioned at the beginning of the chapter is cited here, with 'tac cha...'. He says that this very knowledge was described through the negation of everything else by saying 'having known which...' up to 'neither sat nor asat', and by superimposing attributes on the non-attributed with 'with hands and feet everywhere...', with 'yaj jnatva...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Know both Prakriti and Purusha to be beginningless, and know also modifications and qualities to be born of Prakriti. In the production of activities through the body (effect) and the senses (instruments), Prakriti is said to be the cause, and in the experience of pleasure and pain, Purusha is said to be the cause.

Commentary - [In the third verse of this chapter, the Lord ordered Arjuna to hear four things about the Field: yacc (what it is), yadrik ca (what it is like), yadvikari (what modifications it has), and yatashca yat (from what it has arisen). Among these, yacc was described in the fifth verse and yadvikari in the sixth verse. Yadrik ca will be described later in the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh verses of this chapter. Now, describing yatashca yat, He states that modifications and qualities arise from Prakriti. Here too, if we see, the modifications have already been described in the sixth verse with words like desire, hatred, etc. Here, the fact that qualities arise from Prakriti is stated as something new.
From the twelfth to the eighteenth verse, the Knowable Object (Supreme Lord) is described, and here from the nineteenth to the thirty-fourth verse, the Purusha (Knower of the Field) is described. There, everything is under the Knowable Object, and here, everything is under the Purusha; that is, there the Purusha is under the Knowable Object, and here the Knowable Object is under the Purusha. The point is that the Knowable Object (Supreme Lord) and the Purusha (Knower of the Field) are not two in reality, but are one and the same.]
Prakritim purusham chaiva viddhyanadi ubhavapi - Here, the word Prakriti refers to the Mulaprakriti (primordial nature) which is the cause of the entire Field (world). The seven Prakriti-Vikritis (five elements, ego, and intellect) and sixteen Vikritis (ten senses, mind, and five sense-objects) are all effects of Prakriti, and Prakriti is the root cause of all of them.
Purusham - Here, the word refers to the Knower of the Field, who has been called the Knower of the Field in the first verse of this chapter.
The purpose of calling both Prakriti and Purusha beginningless is that just as this Purusha (jivatma), a part of the Supreme Lord, is beginningless, so is Prakriti also beginningless. There is no difference in their beginninglessness, but there is a difference in their nature. For example—Prakriti has qualities, whereas Purusha is entirely devoid of qualities; Prakriti undergoes modifications, whereas Purusha does not; Prakriti becomes the cause of the world, whereas Purusha does not become the cause of anything; Prakriti has the nature of cause and effect, whereas Purusha is devoid of the nature of cause and effect.
Ubhau eva - The purpose is to show that Prakriti and Purusha are both distinct. Therefore, just as Prakriti and Purusha are beginningless, their distinction (discrimination) is also beginningless.
By the words 'idam shariram kshetram' in the first verse of this chapter, the mind goes towards the human body, i.e., it signifies the individual body, and by the word 'kshetrajnah', it signifies the individual knower of the field who knows the human body. Therefore, the word 'Prakriti' is used here to denote the entire Prakriti and its effects, and the word 'Purusha' is used to denote only the knowers of the field.
In the second verse of this chapter, the word 'viddhi' (know) was used to know the unity of the Knower of the Field with the Supreme Lord, and here 'viddhi' is used to know the distinction of the Purusha from Prakriti. The point is that man considers himself and the body as one; therefore, the Lord here orders Arjuna with the word 'viddhi' to understand clearly that these two are completely separate.
Vikaramshcha gunamshchaiva viddhi prakritisambhavan - Know the seven modifications—desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, the aggregate, consciousness, and fortitude—as well as the three qualities—Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas—to be born of Prakriti. The point of this is that modifications and qualities do not exist in the Purusha.
In the seventh chapter, the Lord described the qualities as arising from Himself (7.12), and here He describes the qualities as arising from Prakriti. The point is that, the context there being devotion, the Lord described the qualities as arising from Himself and spoke of taking refuge in Him to cross over the Maya of qualities. But here, the context being knowledge, the qualities are described as arising from Prakriti. Therefore, the seeker can get free from qualities only by not associating himself with them.
Karyakaranakartritve hetuh prakritiruchyate - The five elements (space, air, fire, water, and earth) and five sense-objects (sound, touch, form, taste, and smell) are called Karya (effects). The ten external senses (ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose, speech, hands, feet, generative organ, and anus) and three internal organs (mind, intellect, and egoism) are called Karana (instruments). In the generation of all activities performed by these, Prakriti alone is the cause.
That which is born is called effect (Karya), and that by which the effect is achieved is called instrument (Karana), i.e., all the tools for action are called instruments. Instruments are of three kinds—(1) organs of action, (2) organs of knowledge, and (3) mind, intellect, and egoism. The organs of action are gross, the organs of knowledge are subtle, and the mind, intellect, and egoism are extremely subtle. The organs of action and knowledge are called external instruments, while the mind, intellect, and egoism are called internal instruments. The organs of action are those through which actions are done, and those which rule over the organs of action and knowledge are the mind, intellect, and egoism. The point is that the organs of action are ruled by the organs of knowledge, the organs of knowledge by the mind, the mind by the intellect, and the intellect by the egoism. Without the mind, intellect, and egoism, the organs of action and knowledge do not function. When the mind is connected with the organs of knowledge, the knowledge of objects takes place. The intellect decides which of the objects known by the mind is acceptable and which is rejectable, which object is right and which is wrong. The egoism rules over the objects decided by the intellect.
Egoism is of two kinds—(1) aham-vritti (ego-sense) and (2) aham-karta (ego-doer). The aham-vritti is never faulty in itself, but when the Purusha associates himself with it and identifies with it, he becomes the doer (aham-karta). The point is that, being deluded by the aham-vritti and being under its control, if he assumes his existence in that aham-vritti, he becomes the doer—'He whose mind is deluded by egoism thinks "I am the doer"' (Gita 3.27).
Intellect (mahat-tattva) is the effect of Prakriti, and egoism (aham-vritti) is the effect of intellect. Although this egoism is the effect of the intellect, yet by identifying with it, he becomes the master of the intellect, i.e., he becomes the doer and the enjoyer—'For the Purusha seated in Prakriti experiences the qualities born of Prakriti' (Gita 13.21). But when the truth is realized, he becomes neither the doer nor the enjoyer—'Dwelling in the body, O son of Kunti, he neither acts nor is contaminated' (Gita 13.31). Then, whatever actions are performed by the body of the Purusha who is free from agentship and enjoyership, all those actions are performed by the aham-vritti alone. The activities performed by this aham-vritti have been described in the Gita in various ways, such as—all activities are performed by Prakriti alone (13.29); all activities are performed by the qualities of Prakriti (3.27); the qualities interact with the qualities (3.28); there is no other doer than the qualities (14.19); the senses interact with their objects (5.9), etc. The point is that all activities performed by the external and internal instruments are done by Prakriti alone.
Purushah sukhaduhkhanam bhoktritve heturuchyate - To be happy (pleased) upon the arrival of favorable circumstances is the experience of pleasure, and to be unhappy (displeased) upon the arrival of unfavorable circumstances is the experience of pain. This experience of pleasure and pain occurs only in the Purusha (conscious entity), not in Prakriti (insentient matter), because insentient Prakriti does not have the capacity to be happy or unhappy. Therefore, Purusha is said to be the cause in the experience of pleasure and pain. If the Purusha does not identify with favorable and unfavorable circumstances and become happy or unhappy, he cannot become the experiencer of pleasure and pain.
In the fourth and fifth verses of the seventh chapter, the Lord described His two natures, Apara (insentient) and Para (conscious). These two natures are the Lord's own nature; hence, they are naturally moving towards the Lord. But the Para Prakriti (conscious), which is a part of the Supreme Lord and whose natural inclination is only to go towards the Lord, gets attracted to temporary pleasure and identifies with the Apara Prakriti (insentient). Not only that, by identifying with Prakriti, he creates an independent existence of his own as the Purusha seated in Prakriti (Gita 13.21), which is called 'I' (aham). In this 'I', both the insentient and conscious are present. The modification in the form of pleasure and pain occurs only in the insentient part, but due to identification with the insentient, its effect is on the knower, the conscious part; that is, due to the connection with the insentient, the conscious part assumes the modification of pleasure and pain in itself, thinking 'I am happy, I am unhappy'. For example, the loss occurs in the shop, but the shopkeeper says 'I suffered a loss'. Fever comes to the body, but he assumes 'I have a fever'. Fever does not come in the Self; if it did, it would never leave.
The effect of pleasure and pain is on the conscious part, only then does it want liberation from pleasure and pain. If it were not happy or unhappy, the desire for liberation could not arise in it. The desire for liberation arises only due to connection with the insentient, because bondage occurred only by accepting the insentient. He who considers himself happy or unhappy, wants liberation from the modification of pleasure and pain, and he alone is liberated. The point is that in identification, the conscious is primary in the desire for liberation (welfare), and the insentient is primary in the desire for enjoyment; therefore, in the end, it is the conscious part that attains welfare, not the insentient.
Modification occurs only in the insentient, not in the conscious. Therefore, in reality, being happy or unhappy is not the attribute of the conscious part; rather, to consider oneself happy or unhappy due to association with the insentient is the nature of the knower, the conscious part. The point is that the conscious part does not become happy or unhappy, but (by identifying with the thoughts of pleasure and pain) assumes itself to be happy or unhappy. How can two opposing states of pleasure and pain exist in the conscious part? Two states can exist only in the changing Prakriti. That which is changeless cannot have two states. The point is that all modifications can occur only in the changing object. The conscious part, while remaining exactly as it is, keeps imposing the modifications of the changing Prakriti on itself due to association with it. This is also everyone's experience that we do not become someone else in pleasure and someone else in pain. Pleasure and pain are both distinct, but we remain the same; therefore, sometimes we are happy and sometimes unhappy.
Relationship - In the previous verse, the Lord stated Purusha as the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain. On this, the question arises as to which Purusha becomes the experiencer of pleasure and pain? The Lord answers this in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The 'Karya' means the body, the 'Karanas' mean the instruments, i.e., the senses of perception and action plus the Manas. In their operations, the Prakrti, subservient to the self, is alone the causal factor. The sense is that their operations, which are the means of experience, have their foundation in the Prakrti, which has developed in the form of the body subservient to the self. In regard to this, the authority is the aphorism, 'The self is an agent, on account of the scriptures having the purpose' (B. S., 2.3.33) etc. The agency of the self means that the self is the cause of the will (effort) to support the body. The self (Purusa) associated with the body is the cause for experiencing pleasures and pains. The meaning is that It is the seat of those experiences.

Thus, has been explained the difference in the operations of the Prakrti and of the self when they are mutually conjoined. He now proceeds to explain how, though the self, which in Its pristine nature experiences Itself by Itself as nothing but joy, becomes the cause of experiencing both pleasure and pain derived from sense objects when It is conjoined with a body.

The term Guna figuratively represents effects. The self (in Its pristine nature) experiences Itself by Itself, as nothing buy joy. But when dwelling in the body, i.e., when It is in conjunction with the Prakrti, It experiences the alities born of Prakrti, namely, happiness, pain etc., which are the effects of Gunas like Sattva etc.

He explains the cause of conjunction with the Prakrti:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.20–13.23 jointly): Prakrtim etc. upto parah.  The Material Cause also is beginningless, because it has no other casue.  Modifications : the cloth and the like.  What is known as Material Cause is the basis for the process of cause-and-effect.  But, the Soul, because of Its importance, constitutes the enjoyer.  [Thus] the Material Cause and the Soul have verily an existence of interdependence just as that of the lame and the blind.  Hence,  the nature of the  Soul is described by the authors of the scriptures by nomenclatures having different forms such as  'the Spectator' and so on.  The meaning, intended here is this : The Material Cause, Its modifications, the fourteen types of creation and also the Soul - this is all beginningless and  perennial as it is completely illuminated by the category Brahman and is identical with it.										
  Hence  [the Bhagavat] said :

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Karya-karana-kartrtve, with regard to the source of body and organs: Karya is the body, and karana are the thirteen [Five sense organs, five motor organs, mind, intellect and ego.] organs existing in it. Here, by the word karya are understood the aforesaid elements that produce the body as also the objects which are modifications born of Nature. And since the alities-which are born of Nature and manifest themselves as happiness, sorrow and delusion-are dependent on the organs, (therefore) they are implied by the word karana, organs. The kartrtvam, (lit) agentship, with regard to these body and organs consists in being the source of the body and organs. With regard to this source of the body and organs, prakrtih, Nature; ucyate, is said to be; the hetuh, cause, in the sense of being the originator. Thus, by virtue of being the source of body and organs, Nature is the cause of mundane existence.
Even if the reading be karya-karana-kartrtva, karya (effect, modification) will mean anything that is the transformation of something; and karana (cause) will be that which becomes transformed. So the meaning of the compund will be: 'with regard to the source of the effect and the cause'.
Or, karya means the sixteen [The eleven organs (five sensory, five motor, and mind) and the five objects (sound etc.).] modificaitons, and karana means the seven [Mahat, egoism, and the five subtle elements.] transformations of Nature. They themselves are called effect and cuase. So far as the agentship with regard to these is concerned Nature is said to be the cause, because of the same reason of being their originator.
As to how the soul can be the cause of mundane existence is being stated: Purusah, the soul, the empirical being, the knower of the field-all these are synonymous; is the hetuh, cause; bhoktrtve, so far as enjoyership, the fact of being the perceiver; sukha-duhkhanam, of happiness and sorrow-which are objects of experience, is concerned.
How, again, is it asserted with respect to Nature and soul that, they are the causes of mundane existence by virtue of this fact of their (respectively) being the source of body and organs, and the perceiver of happiness and sorrow?
As to this the answer is being stated: How can there be any mundane existence if there be no modification of Nature in the form of body and organs, happiness and sorrow, and cause and effect, and there be no soul, the conscious being, to experience them? On the other hand, there can be mundane existence when there is a contact, in the form of ignorance, between Nature-modified in the form of body and organs, and cause and effect as an object of experience and the soul opposed to it as the experiencer. Therefore it was reasonable to have said that, Nature and soul become the cause of mundane existence by (respectively) becoming the originators of the body and organs, and the perceiver of happiness and sorrow.
What again is this that is called worldly existence? Worldly existence consists in the experience of happiness and sorrow; and the state of mundane existence of the soul consists in its being the experiencer of happiness and sorrow.
It has been asserted that the state of mundane existence of the soul consists in its being the experiencer of happiness and sorrow. How does it come about? This is being answered:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Since the instruments (causes) are also effects, mentioning them separately would be redundant. Therefore, relying on conventional usage, he explains the terms 'karya' (effect) and 'karana' (cause/instrument) with 'karyamiti'. Under 'bhoktritve' (in enjoyership), the primary sense of 'bhoga' (experience) as consuming food or enjoying objects is not possible; hence he says 'bhoga' means direct realization as one's own. The Sankhyas object: 'Experience belongs to Prakriti alone, not to Purusha. Thus, how can it be said that Purusha is the cause in the experience of pleasure and pain?' To this, he replies 'sa hi' (for he), meaning not Prakriti, because Prakriti is insentient. Objection: 'But it is said that Prakriti is the cause of agency of cause and effect. Agency consists of knowledge, desire, and effort; then why is experience impossible for Prakriti?' To this he says 'prakritishcha'. Here, the word 'cha' means 'but'. The idea is that agency is figuratively attributed to Prakriti because of its being the material cause undergoing transformation. He cites the Purana's agreement on the meaning of the verse with 'karya...'. The words 'karanam viduh' (they know the cause) are understood in the second half.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
In creation, he states the difference in their functions with 'karya...'. 'Karya' (effect) is in the form of bondage and liberation. The modifications and qualities are the causes of that. In the agency (production) of these, Prakriti presided over by the Purusha is the cause, as it was said 'born of Prakriti' (13.20). As for the Purusha, he is only the animator within. More than that, the agency of the Purusha is accepted as being the cause of effort in presiding over the Field, as stated in the Brahmasutra 'The self is the agent on account of scriptures having a purpose' (2.3.33). He (Purusha), being conjoined with Prakriti, is the cause in the enjoyership of pleasure and pain born of it, i.e., he is the seat of the experience of pleasure, pain, etc. Although both (agency and enjoyership) should be spoken of as attributes of the Field, yet because transformation terminates in the insentient, the Field has dominance in agency; and since experience is seen to terminate in consciousness, the conscious Self has dominance in enjoyership.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Discerning the origin of modifications from Prakriti, he shows the cause of Purusha's worldly existence with 'karya...'. 'Karya' (effect) is the body; 'karana' (instruments) are the thirteen organs residing in it. The five elements that generate the body and the sense-objects are also grasped here by the term 'karya'. The qualities in the form of pleasure, pain, and delusion, because they reside in the instruments, are grasped by the term 'karana'. In the agency of these body and instruments, i.e., in their transformation into those forms, Prakriti is said to be the cause by the great sages. Even in the alternative reading 'karya-karana' (cause and effect), the meaning remains the same. Having thus explained Prakriti's role as the cause of worldly existence, he states the nature of Purusha's causality with 'purushah...'. The Purusha, who is the Knower of the Field and previously described as the higher nature, is said to be the cause in the enjoyership (i.e. perception colored by mental modifications) of all objects of experience, namely pleasure, pain, and delusion.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Showing the origin of modifications from Prakriti, he shows the cause of Purusha's worldly existence with 'karyakarana...'. 'Karya' is the body; 'karana' are the senses which are the instruments of pleasure and pain. In their agency, i.e., in their transformation into those forms, Prakriti is said to be the cause by Kapila and others. Purusha, the Jiva, is said to be the cause in the enjoyership of pleasure and pain produced by them. The idea is: although self-agency is not possible for the insentient Prakriti, and enjoyership is not possible for the changeless Purusha, yet agency means being the accomplisher of action, and that is possible even for the insentient because of being presided over by Consciousness under the influence of the Jiva's unseen destiny (adrishta). For example, the upward burning of fire, the sideways blowing of wind, the flowing of milk from the udder due to the destiny of the calf, etc. Therefore, due to the proximity of the Purusha, agency is attributed to Prakriti. And enjoyership is the experience of pleasure and pain. Since that is indeed an attribute of consciousness, due to the proximity (to Prakriti), enjoyership is attributed to the Purusha.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Dhanpati shows the cause of Prakriti's worldly existence with 'karya...', in response to the query: 'What indeed are the modifications and qualities born of Prakriti?'. 'Karya' (effect) is the body; by this term, the elements generating the body and the sense-objects are grasped. 'Karana' (instruments) are those residing in the body, thirteen in number: the five organs of knowledge, five organs of action, mind, intellect, and egoism. By the term 'karana', the qualities in the form of pleasure, pain, and delusion are also grasped since they reside in the instruments. In the agency (production) of these body and instruments, Prakriti is said to be the cause by way of being their originator. Thus, Prakriti is declared to be the cause of worldly existence by way of being the source of body and instruments. The meaning is the same even in the reading 'karya-karana-kartrtve'. Or, 'karya' refers to the sixteen modifications (eleven organs and five objects) and 'karana' (cause) refers to the seven Prakriti-Vikritis (mahat, egoism, and five subtle elements); in their production, Prakriti is said to be the cause. Having thus shown the role of the lower nature as the cause of worldly existence, he shows the causality of the higher nature with 'purushah...'. Purusha, the Jiva, the Knower of the Field, is said to be the cause in the enjoyership (perception) of pleasure and pain, which are the objects of experience. And thus, if there were no transformation of Prakriti in the form of cause, effect, pleasure, and pain, and if there were no conscious Purusha to perceive them, worldly existence would not be possible. Therefore, Prakriti and Purusha are the causes of worldly existence. Worldly existence is the experience of pleasure and pain, and the state of being worldly for the Purusha is his being the experiencer of pleasure and pain. Others explain it according to the Bhashya... [He then discusses the mutual superimposition of attributes between Prakriti and Purusha, refuting the Sankhya view of independent Purusha, and establishing that the worldly existence of the soul is due to the superimposition of identity with ignorance, which is easily derived from the Bhashya itself.]

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Venkatanatha explains that this verse describes the distinction in activities based on the specific conjunction of Prakriti and Purusha, who are mutually conjoined. 'Karya' is the body; in this context, because of its association with the word 'karana' and the general theme, it refers to the body which is the seat of experience. 'Karana' refers to the senses of perception and action along with the mind. This refutes other interpretations where 'karya' was taken as the ten kinds of subtle elements and 'karana' as intellect and egoism. The alternative reading 'karya-karana-kartrtve' is ignored due to lack of famous usage. The word 'karta' (agent) here does not mean the agent of effort, because that is impossible for the insentient Prakriti; rather, it refers to being the locus of their respective activities. Although some functions of the mind and senses are not subject to the individual's will, yet they require the presiding presence of the Purusha who is in the state of enjoyership, and they are largely dependent on effort. The restriction of activities means that Prakriti alone is the causal factor. The agency of the Purusha is accepted only as being the cause of effort in supporting the body, as established in the Brahmasutra 'The self is the agent on account of scriptures having a purpose' (2.3.33). He (Purusha), conjoined with Prakriti, is the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain born of it, i.e., he is the seat of those experiences. Enjoyment (bhoga) is the direct perception of pleasure and pain. This refutes the view that due to the proximity of the changeless Purusha, Prakriti alone is the enjoyer, which would contradict the Sankhya scriptures themselves (such as Sankhyakarika 17 and 21) as well as the Brahmasutras (from 2.2.1 to 2.2.10). [He further discusses the details of how the soul's association with qualities and births is due to attachment, which leads to worldly existence until the rise of virtues like humility and self-realization.]

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Purushottamji clarifies this with 'karya...'. In the production (manifestation) of 'karya' (effect), which is of the nature of experiencing one's own bliss, and its 'karanas' (instruments) which are the body, qualities, etc., Prakriti, described earlier as the divine power, is said to be the cause. Similarly, Purusha is said to be the cause (source) in the enjoyership (perception) of pleasure and pain, which are in the form of union, separation, etc.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Neelakantha explains the channel through which both act as the cause of worldly existence with 'karya...'. 'Karya' is the body, the elements generating it, and the sense-objects. 'Karana' refers to the thirteen senses and the qualities in the form of pleasure, pain, and delusion residing in them. In the production of these cause and effect, Prakriti is the cause of worldly existence. Purusha is the cause of worldly existence by way of experiencing pleasure and pain. If Prakriti did not transform in the form of body, senses, pleasure, and pain, what would the Purusha perceive? Without perception, how could he be worldly? And what use would Prakriti be without a perceiver? Therefore, the union of the object of perception and the perceiver is the cause of worldly existence, as explained in the Bhashya. Alternatively, Prakriti alone, having identified with the Purusha, is the cause in the Purusha's state of being the effect, cause, and agent. Just as iron conjoined with fire becomes the cause of burning, so the Purusha is the cause in Prakriti's experiencing pleasure and pain by reflecting his light. The attributes of the body, senses, and intellect, such as being fair, being a son, being blind, and being the doer, are superimposed on the conscious Self. Similarly, the intellect, reflecting the light of consciousness, thinks 'I experience pleasure and pain'. This mutual superimposition of attributes between Prakriti and Purusha is the cause of worldly existence. This also refutes the independent enjoyership of the Purusha as held by the Sankhyas, which would result in the contradiction of Prakriti being the doer and Purusha being the enjoyer. [He further discusses the grammatical aspects of the compound words in the verse.]

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Nature is said to be the cause of all material causes and effects, whereas the living entity is the cause of the various sufferings and enjoyments in this world.

 The different manifestations of body and senses among the living entities are due to material nature. There are 8,400,000 different species of life, and these varieties are creations of the material nature. They arise from the different sensual pleasures of the living entity, who thus desires to live in this body or that. When he is put into different bodies, he enjoys different kinds of happiness and distress. His material happiness and distress are due to his body, and not to himself as he is. In his original state there is no doubt of enjoyment; therefore that is his real state. Because of the desire to lord it over material nature, he is in the material world. In the spiritual world there is no such thing. The spiritual world is pure, but in the material world everyone is struggling hard to acquire different kinds of pleasures for the body. It might be more clear to state that this body is the effect of the senses. The senses are instruments for gratifying desire. Now, the sum total – body and instrument senses – is offered by material nature, and as will be clear in the next verse, the living entity is blessed or damned with circumstances according to his past desire and activity. According to one’s desires and activities, material nature places one in various residential quarters. The being himself is the cause of his attaining such residential quarters and his attendant enjoyment or suffering. Once placed in some particular kind of body, he comes under the control of nature because the body, being matter, acts according to the laws of nature. At that time, the living entity has no power to change that law. Suppose an entity is put into the body of a dog. As soon as he is put into the body of a dog, he must act like a dog. He cannot act otherwise. And if the living entity is put into the body of a hog, then he is forced to eat stool and act like a hog. Similarly, if the living entity is put into the body of a demigod, he must act according to his body. This is the law of nature. But in all circumstances, the Supersoul is with the individual soul. That is explained in the Vedas ( Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.1.1) as follows: dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyaḥ. The Supreme Lord is so kind upon the living entity that He always accompanies the individual soul and in all circumstances is present as the Supersoul, or Paramātmā.