Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yatanto yoginaścainaṃ paśyantyātmanyavasthitam .
yatanto.apyakṛtātmāno nainaṃ paśyantyacetasaḥ

Word Meanings:
यतन्तः - striving
योगिनः - the Yogins
च - and
एनम् - this
पश्यन्ति - see
आत्मनि - in the Self
अवस्थितम् - dwelling
यतन्तः - striving
अपि - also
अकृतात्मानः - the unrefined
न - not
एनम् - this
पश्यन्ति - see
अचेतसः - unintelligent.

Life Application:
Striving practitioners behold the soul seated in Self; the unrefined and undisciplined see It not, though striving.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Striving Yogins perceive Him dwelling in the Self; but the unrefined and the unintelligent, even though striving, see Him not.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Yogins striving (for perfection) behold Him dwelling in the Self; but, the unrefined and unintelligent, even though striving, see Him not.

यतन्तः striving (for perfection)? योगिनः the Yogins? च and? एनम् this? पश्यन्ति see? आत्मनि in the Self? अवस्थितम् dwelling? यतन्तः striving? अपि also? अकृतात्मानः the unrefined? न not? एनम् this? पश्यन्ति see? अचेतसः unintelligent.Commentary The description of the evolution of the individual soul is now complete.The Yogins who strive with an iron determination? fiery resolve? faith? earnestness and wellbalanced mind? see Him established in their hearts. They behold Him dwelling in their own mind or intellect. They recognise Him -- This I am. But those who are of full intellect and without proper discipline of the mind and the senses? who have not been purified by austerity? selfless service and charity? who have not subdued their senses? who have not practised regular meditation? who have not given up their evil ways? who have not eradicated lust? pride? egoism? anger? greed and hypocrisy? who have not developed true discrimination between the Real and the unreal? however hard they may struggle to know Him by means of the study of the sacred scriptures? do not behold Him. They are not able to attain Selfrealisation. Mere study of scriptues alone cannot help one who has an impure mind to attain Selfrealisation. The aspirant should have a calm and pure mind. He should practise constant? protracted and profound meditation on the Self. Only then will he realise? recognise and behold the Self abiding in his own heart.That Goal (the Supreme Being) which the fire? stars? lightning? sun and moon do not illumine? having reached which the aspirants do not return to this Samsara or the world of birth and death? of which the individual souls are only imaginary parts appearing so on account of the limiting adjunct (ignorance)? just as the ether in the pot appears to be limited though it is one with the,universal ether -- is the essence of all worldly experiences.Just as the ether in the pot becomes identical with the universal ether when the limiting adjunct (pot) is broken? so also the individual soul becomes identical with the Supreme Being when the limiting adjunct (ignorance) is destroyed through the knowledge of the Self or Selfrealisation born of meditation on the right significance of the great sentences of the Upanishads? viz.? TatTvamAsi (That thou art) or AhamBrahmaAsmi (I am the Supreme Being). Then he realises that Brahman is the essence of all and tht He is the basis of all experiences.In order to make Arjuna understand this? the Lord gives a brief summary of His manifestations in the following four verses. A description is given here of the allpervasiveness of the Self.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The saints with great effort find Him within themselves; but not the unintelligent, who in spite of every effort cannot control their minds.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The striving Yogins see It established in themselves. But, though striving, those of unrefined minds, devoid of intelligence, perceive It not.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda highlights the pre-requisites for Self-realization. He explains that only those seekers who have purified their minds through selfless action (Karma Yoga) and devotion (Bhakti Yoga) and have developed discrimination (Viveka) can perceive the Self within themselves. Seekers who merely perform mechanical spiritual practices without inner purification and without quietening their ego and desires will fail to see the Self, even if they strive for years. They are called 'unrefined' (akritatmanah) and 'devoid of intelligence' (acetasah) because their intellect has not been sharpened by the study of scriptures and self-analysis. Realization is not just a matter of dry labor, but of subjective purification.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The exerting men of Yoga perceive Him dwelling in the Self. [But] the unintelligent men with their uncontrolled self do not perceive Him, even though they exert.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The striving Yogins see It established in themselves. But, though striving, those of unrefined minds, devoid of intelligence, perceive It not.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And the yogis who are diligent see this one as existing in themselves. The non-discriminating ones who lack self-control do not see this one-though (they be) diligent.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya comments that only those Jivas whose intellects have been purified by true spiritual knowledge (Jnana) and who are fixed in contemplation are able to perceive the Lord dwelling within. The unrefined whose minds are impure and contaminated by false philosophies cannot perceive Him despite their external efforts.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that merely studying the scriptures or performing logical analysis is not sufficient to realize the Atman. Seekers must possess refined minds through practices of austerity and sensory control. Without internal tranquility and humility, all intellectual efforts remain fruitless.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Striving Yogins perceive Him dwelling in the Self; but the unrefined and the unintelligent, even though striving, see Him not.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'Yogins' refers to seekers of truth who are single-mindedly devoted to Self-realization. By detaching from the unreal (samsara), they easily experience the eternally present Supreme Reality within themselves. The word 'yatantah' indicates deep earnestness and longing. On the other hand, the 'unrefined' (akritatmanah) are those who still value worldly pleasures and identification with the body. The 'unintelligent' (acetasah) are those who fail to value their discrimination (Viveka). Even if they practice meditation or scriptural study, they cannot experience the divine because they rely on material instruments (body, mind) rather than letting go of ego and surrendering to the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The 'striving Yogins' i.e., those striving in the path of Karma Yoga etc., after practising Prapatti (self-surrender), purify their inner organs of perception and percieve the self as established in Its own form as distinct from the body, with the eye of Yoga, But those of 'unrefined minds,' namely those who do not practise Prapatti to Me, and are therefore of 'uncultivated minds, and devoid of intelligence' find themselves incapable of perceiving the self. They do not perceive It in distinction from the body.

Thus, it has been said that the self, whether released or not, is a manifestation of the glory (Vibhuti) of the Lord, Its light of knowledge illuminates even the luminaries such as the sun, moon and fire which help the senses to see by removing the darkness that prevents the contact of the senses with their objects as described (in the verses):  'That supreme light ৷৷. is Mine' (15.6) and 'An everlasting part of Myself having become the (bound) self in the world of life' (15.7). Now, He declares that even the lights of the sun and other luminaries, which form particular developments of Prakrti, are Vibhutis of the Lord:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Srotram etc. upto asetasah.  Mind :  the internal organ is hery implied.  Hence, due to His association of  the bodily existence, when He remains  [in the body], or rises up to seize another body, or enjoys the sense objects - at that time the deluded persons do not perceive Him, because they are not well enlightened.  But, considering everything as manifestation of the  [Self] awareness, the highly enlightened men recognize Him.  Thus they are men of unbroken contemplation.  Because they are engrossed in their exertion.
 
But in the case of those who have not mastered their self (mind),  even their effort does not  yield any fruit, because their passion has not yet been fully decayed. Indeed the seeds of corn, sown during the autumnal season are not capable of yielding a rich harvest, even though the means like water etc., get collected together. Therefore, it (the water etc.) does not constitute a collection of means.  Indeed totally different is the water  sent forth by the mass of  clouds that had been filled up in the month of Madhu.  Altogether different is the earth that  had been under the grip of the Cold-season (Sisira)  and has (now) brilliance  by the simple touch of the sun-rays.  In the same way, the effort of the men of uncontrolled  self, never gets to the stage of fulfilment of all reisities .  That is why those  who, even after receiving the means like the inititation etc.  necessary for the realisation of the Supreme Lord, continue to have their inner vision filled with the collection of the knots (granthi) of anger, bewilderment etc., in the manner as before-in their case, even the means does never bear any fruit.  This must be borne in mind.  For, it is has been said :
 
'When anger etc., are seen, then even the initiated one never gets emancipation'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And some, however, yoginah, the yogis of concentrated minds; yatantah, who are diligent; pasyanti, see; evam, this one, the Self under discussion; as avasthitam, existing; atmani, in themselves, in their own intelligence. They realize, 'I am This.'
Acetasah, the non-discriminating ones; akrta-atmanah, who lack self-control, who have not purified themselves through austerity and control of the organs, who have not desisted from bad conduct, who are not tranil and are proud by nature; na, do not; pasyanti, see; enam, this one; api, though; (they be) yatantah, diligent-even though they be striving with the help of the valid means of knowledge such as the scriptures.
With a view to speaking of the all-pervasiveness of the State and the fact of Its being the substratum of all empirical dealings, the Lord speaks in brief through the following four verses of the divine manifestations of that State which the light of fire, sun, etc. do not illumine though they are the illuminators of everything; and reaching which the aspirants of Liberation do not return again towards mundane existence; and of which State the individual souls, owing to their conformity with the diversity of limiting adjuncts, are parts, just as spaces enclosed in pot etc. are 'parts' of Space:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha explains that success in perceiving the indwelling Lord is reserved for those who have surrendered to Him and purified their intellect. Striving with an unpurified mind leads to no realization, as the light of the Lord is hidden from those who lack devotion.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that the Yogins, who have controlled their mental modifications, perceive the Self. Others, whose minds are unrefined (akrita-chitta) and who are dull-witted (acetasah), do not perceive Him even though they strive through study or austerity.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that 'striving' (yatantah) means practicing contemplation and meditation. The Yogis with concentrated minds perceive the Self reflected in their intellect. In contrast, those who have not purified their hearts through selfless sacrifices and remain devoid of discrimination cannot see It, even though they may strive through external studies.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that this truth is difficult to know. Striving Yogins perceive the Self within their own bodies as distinct from it. But those whose minds are unpurified (akritatmanah) and who are of dull intellect (acetasah) fail to see It despite their efforts in scriptural studies.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that even when both groups strive through scriptural study, one succeeds and the other fails due to the presence or absence of mental purity (chitta-shuddhi). Purification of the mind through control of senses and detachment is the critical factor that transforms scriptural knowledge into direct realization.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the Yogins, by practicing self-surrender (Prapatti) to the Lord and Karma Yoga, purify their minds and perceive the Self as distinct from the body with the eye of Yoga. Those who lack devotion to the Lord are of unrefined minds and cannot perceive It.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that only devotees (bhaktas) succeed in seeing the Jiva and its divine connection. Those who rely on mere dry yoga or intellectual striving without devotion and holy association (satsanga) remain blind, as their minds lack spiritual illumination.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'striving' refers to the practice of hearing (shravana) and contemplation (manana). The Yogis whose minds are controlled perceive the Self as all-pervading and untainted. The unrefined, whose hearts are not purified by sacrifices and whose minds are uncontrolled, cannot see It.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The endeavoring transcendentalists who are situated in self-realization can see all this clearly. But those whose minds are not developed and who are not situated in self-realization cannot see what is taking place, though they may try.

 There are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-realization, but one who is not situated in self-realization cannot see how things are changing in the body of the living entity. The word yoginaḥ is significant in this connection. In the present day there are many so-called yogīs, and there are many so-called associations of yogīs, but they are actually blind in the matter of self-realization. They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic exercise and are satisfied if the body is well built and healthy. They have no other information. They are called yatanto ’py akṛtātmānaḥ. Even though they are endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized. Such people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the soul. Only those who are actually in the yoga system and have realized the self, the world and the Supreme Lord – in other words, the bhakti-yogīs, those engaged in pure devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness – can understand how things are taking place.