Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
pañcaitāni mahābāho kāraṇāni nibodha me .
sāṅkhye kṛtānte proktāni siddhaye sarvakarmaṇām

Word Meanings:
पञ्च - five
एतानि - these
महाबाहो - O mightyarmed
कारणानि - causes
निबोध - learn
मे - from Me
सांख्ये - in the Sankhya
कृतान्ते - which is the end
प्रोक्तानि - as declared
सिद्धये - for the accomplishment
सर्वकर्मणाम् - of all actions.

Life Application:
Learn five causes declared in Sankhya philosophy for accomplishment of all actions.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O mighty-armed one, learn from Me these five factors declared in the Sankhya system for the accomplishment of all actions.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Learn from Me, O mighty-armed Arjuna, these five causes as declared in the Sankhya system for the accomplishment of all actions.

पञ्च five? एतानि these? महाबाहो O mightyarmed? कारणानि causes? निबोध learn? मे from Me? सांख्ये in the Sankhya? कृतान्ते which is the end of all actions? प्रोक्तानि as declared? सिद्धये for the accomplishment? सर्वकर्मणाम् of all actions.Commentary The Self has no connection whatevr with activity. Nature does everything. The Self is the silent witness. He remains indifferent. The whole superstructure of human activity is the result of the five welldefined causes which are enumerated in the following verse.Etani These Which are going to be mentioned.Sankhya Vedanta Knowledge of the Self as taught in the Vedanta (the Upanishads) puts an end to all actions. This is the reason why the term Kritante (the end of actions) is used here. When the knowledge of the Self arises? all actions terminate. This is taught in chapter II? verse 46 To the Brahman who has known the Self al the Vedas are of so much use as is a reservoir of water in a place where there is a flood everywhere. Again? in verse 33 of chapter IV? it is said All actions in their entirety? O Arjuna? culminate in knowledge. Vedanta? therefore? which imparts knowledge of the Self? is the end of action. A liberated sage who has attained the knowledge of the Self in accordance with the instructions laid down in the Vedanta becomes a Kritakritya (one who has done everything and has nothing more to do).

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
I will tell thee now, O Mighty Man, the five causes which, according to the final decision of philosophy, must concur before an action can be accomplished.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In the context of the threefold abandonment, Lord Krishna called a person who performs actions without egoism and attachment a Sattvik abandoner. Therefore, it is natural that a curiosity arises in the mind of Arjuna to know the nature of action. Hence, in the present section, Lord Krishna describes the gross form of action as well as its subtle nature such as motivation, purpose, etc. For the accomplishment of any worldly or spiritual action, five causes are required. These are, as it were, parts of action, without which action cannot be accomplished. If a man wishes to discipline and systematize his actions to achieve internal cultural development, he requires immense courage, continuity of purpose, self-confidence, and intellectual capacity. Therefore, the Lord here addresses Arjuna as "mighty-armed" (Mahabaho), calling upon his valor. The description of the five causes necessary for the performance of action has been made in the Sankhya philosophy. Here, the word Sankhya refers to Vedanta, and not to the Sankhya philosophy of Sage Kapila, because they are not described there. The word "kritante" used in this verse is an adjective qualifying Sankhya. "Kritanta" means the end of actions. Upon the dawn of Self-knowledge taught in Vedanta, the egoism comes to an end, and with that, his actions terminate. Therefore, the adjective "kritanta" is used for Vedanta. In the next verse, He states those five causes:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O mighty-armed one !  Learn from Me these following five causes that have been declared in the conclusion of deliberations [on proper knowledge], for the accomplishment of all actions.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Learn from Me, O Arjuna, these five causes for the accomplishment of all acts, as described in Sankhya-krtanta - the science of the exact understanding of things for the accomplishment of works.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O mighty-armed one, learned from Me these [Another reading is etani.-Tr.] five factors for the accomplishment of all actions, which have been spoken of in the Vedanta in which actions terminate.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
To explain sannyasa again in detail, He states the causes of action: "pañca..." (five...) etc. "sāṅkhye kṛtānte" means in the philosophy of Knowledge (Jnana-siddhanta).

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Objection: "Since it is no different from secondary renunciation, why should there not be primary renunciation also for the ignorant, as abandonment is easy?" To this he says: "Therefore, the knower of the supreme Truth...". The meaning of the reason is: in his case, when ignorance is negated by right perception, the actions, agents, etc., superimposed by it are negated. Having stated the possibility of the renunciation of all actions in the case of one who possesses knowledge, he shows who is excluded by the word "only": "but not...". In the case of the ignorant person who cannot renounce all actions and their causes like attachment, etc., he states the reason: the perception of the seat, etc., which are the factors of action, as the Self: "action...". Raising the question, "How are the seat, etc., the agents of action, and how does the wise man have the notion of the Self in them?", he states the import of the succeeding four verses: "Therefore, this...". At the outset, he removes the doubt about the seat, etc., which are meant for action, being unauthoritative: "five...". The word "in the sequel" means in the seat, etc., which are going to be mentioned. The difference among those very categories is wished to be shown, and indeed, it cannot be known without concentration of the mind. He explains the etymology of the word Sankhya: "fit to be known...". The Self is the meaning of the word "thou", Brahman is the meaning of the word "that", and the comprehension of their identity, and also "hearing, etc." which are useful for that, are fully stated (sankhyayante), i.e., explained. He explains how the word "kritante" refers to Vedanta in: "kritam..." etc. To show that Vedanta is the state of termination of actions through the knowledge of Truth, he shows the agreement with the introductory text: "as much...". Just as whatever utility like bathing, etc., exists in a well, etc., all that is accomplished in a reservoir of water; therefore, just as all work done in a well is included in the reservoir, so whatever fruit exists in all the Vedas meant for action, all that is included in the knowledge of the Brahmana who has known the Self, meaning that for one who has attained knowledge, there remains no duty to be performed. On the same point, he cites another text: "all...". He states the import of the two cited texts: "Self...". Raising the doubt, "Even if all actions cease when the knowledge of the Self arises, how is Vedanta the end of actions (kritanta)?", he says: "Hence...". The connection is with the preceding words: "learn those from My words".

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Learn from Me, O mighty-armed one, these five factors declared in the Sankhya doctrine which brings an end to all actions, for the accomplishment of all actions. Commentary — pañcaitāni mahābāho kāraṇāni — O mighty-armed one, in the Sankhya doctrine where all actions terminate, five factors are declared for the performance of all prescribed and prohibited actions. The Self (true nature) is not a factor in those actions. nibodha me — Wherever the Lord has started the description of the Sankhya doctrine in this chapter, He has used the verb "nibodha" (know/learn) (18.13, 18.50), whereas in other places He has used the verb "śṛṇu" (hear) (18.4, 18.19, 18.29, 18.36, 18.45, 18.64). The implication is that in the Sankhya doctrine, the word "nibodha" calls for understanding thoroughly, and elsewhere the word "śṛṇu" calls for listening. Therefore, the Sankhya doctrine should be understood deeply. If it is understood deeply by one's own self, the realization of Truth occurs instantly. sāṅkhye kṛtānte proktāni siddhaye sarvakarmaṇām — Whether actions are scripturally ordained or scripturally prohibited, whether physical, mental, or vocal, whether gross or subtle — five factors are stated for the accomplishment of all these actions. When a person has the sense of agency in these actions, then both the accomplishment of action and the accumulation of actions occur; and when a person does not have the sense of agency in the occurrence of these actions, then the accomplishment of action does occur, but the accumulation of actions does not occur; instead, there is mere activity. For example, change occurs in the entire world, i.e., rivers flow, wind blows, trees grow, etc. activities continue to occur; but no accumulation of actions occurs from these activities, i.e., these activities do not produce vice or virtue, nor are they binding. The implication is that only through the pride of agency (kartritva-abhimana) do the accomplishment of action and the accumulation of actions occur. On the eradication of the pride of agency, only four factors — the seat, instrument, effort, and destiny — remain in mere activity (Gita 18.14). Here, the Sankhya doctrine is being described. In the Sankhya doctrine, discrimination and reflection predominate; then why did the Lord introduce the topic of actions for the "accomplishment of all actions" here? The reason is that Arjuna is facing a war. Being a Kshatriya, war is his bounden duty. Therefore, through Karma Yoga or Sankhya Yoga, actions must be performed in such a way that one remains completely untainted by them even while performing them — this is what the Lord wants to say. Arjuna has asked about the truth of Sankhya; therefore, the Lord begins to speak about performing actions from the standpoint of the Sankhya doctrine. Arjuna wished to renounce actions physically; therefore, he had to be made to understand that both the acceptance and the renunciation of actions are not the causes of welfare. The cause of welfare is only the dissociation of one's immutable, imperishable self from changing, perishable Nature (prakriti). There are two processes of that dissociation: Karma Yoga and Sankhya Yoga. In Karma Yoga, the renunciation of the fruit, i.e., possessiveness (mamata) is primary; and in Sankhya Yoga, the renunciation of egoism (ahanta) is primary. But by the renunciation of possessiveness, egoism is automatically renounced; and by the renunciation of egoism, possessiveness is automatically renounced. Because even in egoism there is possessiveness, for example: "my word should stand, my word should not be refuted" — this is "my-ness" even with "I-ness". Therefore, by giving up possessiveness (my-ness), egoism (I-ness) is eradicated. Similarly, first there is egoism, then there is possessiveness; i.e., first there is "I", then there is "mine". But where egoism (I-ness) itself is renounced, how can possessiveness (my-ness) remain? That too will inevitably be eradicated. Relationship — Now He states what the five factors are in the accomplishment of all actions.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Sankhya' means Buddhi (reasoning). 'Sankhya-krtanta' means that which is determined after due deliberations by the Buddhi in accordance with the Vedas on the nature of the things as they are. Learn them from Me. There are five causes for the accomplishment of all actions. But the understanding according to the Vedas (Vaidiki-buddhi) is that the Supreme Self alone is the agent working through body, senses, Pranas and the individual self, as asserted in the following Srutis:  'He who, dwelling in the self, who rules the self from within your self, the Inner Ruler, immortal' (Br. U. Madh., 3.7.22), and 'He who has penetrated the interior, is the Ruler of all creatures and the Self of all' (Tai. A., 3.11.3).

Sri Krsna nows sets forth the five causes:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.13–18.17 jointly): Panca etc. upto na nibadhyate Conclusion :  the established end, because here a decision is arrived at.  Basis : the material object Destiny :  the good and  bad result  [of actions] previously accumulated.  These five viz., the basis etc., constitute the entire assembly of factors and hence they are the causes for each action.
 
But other [commentators give an etymology of]  adhisthana 'basis' to mean 'That by which all actions are governed'; and on that ground they believe that it denotes that action which exists in the intellect; which comes ot be due to the Rajas, and is being prone to transform itself into the pentad of (the mental dispositions viz.)  the content, the faith, the happiness, the desire to know and the aversion to know; which is referable by the term karma-yoga  (that which yokes man into activity); and which is described at times by the term prayatna 'effort'.
 
Agent :  the ascertainer characterised by the intellect.  Instrument :  [the personal instruments viz.] the mind, the eye etc., and also the external ones like sword etc.  Activity :  the activity of  upper life-breath, nether life-breath etc.  The effects of the righteous and unrighteous acts are indicated by the term Destiny.  All the dispositions located in the intellect are indicated by these two.  Still other commentators, however, take Basis to be the Absolute Lord.
 
Due to his  imperfect intellect :  because of his having indecisive  knowledge.  But he, who performs actions with the stability due to disappearance of th I-sense  (limited) and  [a stability] refined by hundreds of reasoning, as detailed earlier - he does not get the fetter, because he is a man of perfect intellect.  This is what is intended  [in the passage under study].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O mighty-armed one, nibodha, learn; me, from Me; imani, these; panca, five; karanani, factors, accessories, which are going to be stated-for drawing the attention of his (Arjuna's) mind and for showing the difference among these categories [Categories: locus (body) etc], the Lord praises those accessories in the succeeding verses as fit for being known-; siddhaye, for the accomplishment; sarva-karmanam, of all actions; proktani, which have been spoken of; sankhye, in Vedanta-sankhya is that scripture where the subject-matters [In the sentence, 'Thou art That', the word Thou means the individual Self, and That means Brahman. The comprehension of their unity, and also 'hearing, reflection and meditation' are referred to as the subject-matters.] to be known are fully (samyak) stated (khyayante)-; krtante, in which actions terminate. Krtante alifies that very word (Vedanta).
Krtam mean action. That in which occurs the culmination (anta) of that krtam is krtantam, i.e. the termination of actions. In the texts, '৷৷.as much utility as a man has in a well' (2.46), and 'O son of Prtha, all actions in their totality culminate in Knowledge' (4.33), the Lord shows the cessation of all actions when the knowledge of the Self dawns. Hence (it is said): '৷৷.which have been spoken of in that Vedanta where actions culminate and which is meant for the knowledge of the Self.'
Which are they? This is being answered:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Explaining the connection of the verse "pañca..." etc. with the context which is not apparent, he says: "again...". In order to explain in detail again the previously mentioned sannyasa, which is not merely the renunciation of desire-driven actions but also the abandonment of the pride of agency; and to refute the objection: "If the Self is a non-doer, how can the production of action occur? If agency is to be admitted, how is the abandonment of the pride of agency proper?", he states the causes of action which are indeed different from the Self. This is the meaning. The word Sankhya is conventionally used for Kapila's system. Someone has explained the word "kritanta" as referring to the Upanishads where the cessation (anta) of actions performed (kritam) is spoken of. To refute both these views, he says: "sāṅkhye...". The word siddhanta (doctrine) means the doctrine of Knowledge. By "siddhanta", the scripture of knowledge is indicated; because Kapila's system is condemned and the Upanishads do not teach the physical renunciation of actions.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Now, preceded by the contemplation of the Lord's agency, the abandonment of the contemplation of one's own agency is spoken of. Just as one who considers agency to be one's own when there are five factors of action is censured in the world, so is he censured by Krishna through scriptures. When he perceives the causality of the attributes, or of destiny, or of Hari (the Lord), then alone does the abandonment of possessiveness for actions and fruits occur here. Therein, agency resides primarily in the Inner Controlling Person with His own instruments. (The individual self then begins actions for the sake of His sport). Because of independence, but in the dependent individual self, it is admitted to be only secondary. Therefore, all agency, etc. residing in Brahman is in the individual self on account of its being His part. All fruits of actions also belong to the Supreme Person, and they are dedicated to the Person in the next world. This truth is declared by the Lord at the end of this section. "pañca..." O mighty-armed one, learn from Me, i.e., pay attention to My words, these five factors declared in the Sankhya, i.e., in the doctrine or the established conclusion, for the accomplishment of all actions. For, in the Sankhya, the composition of aphorisms is seen in accordance with the Vedas; in accordance with that, it teaches that the Supreme Self, the Inner Controller, is the ultimate agent who has the body, senses, life-breath, and individual self as His instruments. In passages like: "He who, dwelling in the self, rules the self from within, whom the self does not know, whose body the self is, He is your Self, the Inner Ruler, immortal" (Shatapatha Brahmana 14.5.30), and "He who has entered within is the Ruler of all creatures and the Self of all" (Taittiriya Aranyaka 3.11), the agency of ruling, etc., is taught as belonging independently only to the Supreme Self. That agency which belongs to Him alone is always pure in the individual self which is His part, whereas other natural (prakrita) agency is denied. This will be made clear later.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The reason for the transmigratory state of one who is devoid of Self-knowledge was stated as the impossibility of renouncing actions: "It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all activities" (Gita 18.11). What is the reason for the impossibility of the renunciation of actions in the case of the ignorant person? It is identification with the five factors of action starting with the seat. He explains this import in four verses. Therein, in the first verse, He says that these five factors starting with the seat, which are rooted in the authority of Vedanta, must definitely be known for the sake of being abandoned: "pañcaitāni..." (five...). O mighty-armed one, learn from My words, i.e., from the words of Mine who am the Supreme, All-knowing Lord, these five factors, accessories going to be mentioned, for the accomplishment, i.e., performance, of all actions; be attentive to understand. Indeed, these factors, being extremely difficult to know, cannot be known by an inattentive mind; thus, by enjoining concentration of the mind, He praises them. And by addressing him as "mighty-armed", He indicates that only a noble person is capable of knowing them; this is indeed for the sake of praise. Are these to be known only from My words without any authority? To this He says: "no, they are spoken of in the Sankhya in which actions terminate". They must be known for the attainment of the unsurpassed goal of life and for the cessation of all evils. "Sankhya" is the scripture of Vedanta, in which the individual self, Brahman, their identity, and also "hearing, etc." which are useful for that comprehension, are fully stated (sankhyayante), i.e., explained. In that scripture which propounds only the Reality of the Self, why are the five causes of actions, which are non-Self, unreal, and well-known in the world, propounded? To this, the adjective of the scripture is: "kritante" (in which actions terminate). Action is called "kritam"; that in which the termination (anta) of actions occurs through the dawn of Self-knowledge is the scripture "kritanta". They are declared in that scripture. Those very factors which are well-known in the world, are non-Self, and are grasped as the Self by the superimposition of false knowledge, are spoken of in the scripture as fit to be abandoned for the sake of establishing their sublation by the knowledge of the Truth of the Self. For when it is said that action, which is indeed the attribute of another (the non-Self), is superimposed on the Self by ignorance, then by the knowledge of the pure Self, due to its sublation, an end of action is made. Therefore, to propound the non-connection of the Self with action, these five causes of action which are indeed non-Self are restated in the scripture of Vedanta as imagined by Me; hence there is no loss of import of the non-dual Self alone. Because other things are propounded only as auxiliary to that. And here also, the end of all actions in knowledge has been propounded: "all actions in their entirety, O Arjuna, culminate in Knowledge" (Gita 4.33). Therefore, it is reasonable that the scripture of knowledge is the end of action.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Raising the objection: "How can one who performs action not reap the fruit of action?", He speaks the five verses starting with "pañcaitāni..." to establish that for one who has renounced attachment and is free from egoism, there is no tainting by the fruit of action. Learn, i.e., know from My words, these five factors going to be mentioned for the accomplishment, i.e., performance, of all actions. In order to praise them, indicating that they must definitely be known for the eradication of the pride of agency of the Self, He says: "sāṅkhye...". "Sankhya" is the knowledge of Truth by which the Supreme Self is fully known; "kritante" is that in which the actions performed (kritam) have their end or termination; the meaning is: in the established conclusion of Vedanta. Or, "Sankhya" is that in which the principles are counted (sankhyayante); "kritanta" is that in which the final decision (anta) is made; meaning: declared in the Sankhya philosophy itself. Therefore, learn them well.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Thus, having stated the absence of the threefold fruit of action in the case of primary sannyasis, He speaks the verse beginning with "pañcaitāni..." in order to teach the necessity of the knowledge of the non-agency of the Self, which is the cause of qualification for primary sannyasa. Learn, i.e., know from My words, these factors going to be mentioned which are the producers of action. And addressing him as "mighty-armed" (Mahabaho), He hints: "Having known this, abandon the pride of agency in this physical action of war which is to be accomplished by mighty arms." In order to praise them to indicate that they must definitely be known, He says: "sāṅkhye...". "Sankhya" is the scripture of Vedanta in which the Self (the meaning of the word "thou"), Brahman (the meaning of the word "that"), the comprehension of their identity, and also things like control of the mind and senses, etc. which are useful for that, are fully stated (sankhyayante), i.e., explained. He qualifies Sankhya by "kritante": where the termination (anta) of actions performed (kritam) occurs. Since the cessation of all actions is shown when Self-knowledge arises, the Sankhya which is meant for Self-knowledge is also called "kritanta". "declared in that" means they are spoken of for the accomplishment, i.e., performance, of all actions. The meaning, "Sankhya is liberating knowledge, and in that which is related to it and produces it, in the non-created (akrita) Veda due to its being of non-human origin, and in the end (anta) of that, i.e., in Vedanta", was not shown by the teachers, keeping in mind that the meaning is possible indeed without resorting to division of words. As for what others explain: "Sankhya is that in which the principles are counted (sankhyayante); 'kritanta' is that in which the final decision (anta) is made; meaning: declared in the Sankhya philosophy itself" — that is not to be accepted. Because in the Sankhya philosophy, the seat, etc. are not stated as the causes of action. And also because the Sankhya philosophy, which propounds that the experiencing selves are many, is contradictory to one's own established conclusion that the Self is one, free from agency and experiencing; hence it cannot be cited as authority for the meaning stated by oneself.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Explaining the connection of the statement of the five causes immediately after "undesired, desired..." (Gita 18.12), he says: "now...". The meaning is: when the direct subject of the question has been answered. By the two words "in the Lord, the Supreme Person", the state of being the Inner Ruler of all and the absence of defects residing in Him and caused by Him are declared in the manner stated before. By saying "He states the manner", it is shown that the contemplation of non-agency which has been followed since the third chapter is here clarified with reasons on the nature of the self as it is. When the three kinds of abandonment have been introduced, the connection is the clarification of the manner of one of them. When all three kinds of abandonment have been introduced as Sattvik, why is only the manner of abandonment of agency expounded? To this he says: "therefore alone...". The word "iti" here denotes cause. Even though the priests, etc. are the agents, possessiveness for action and fruit is seen in the sacrificer (yajamana); why should it not be similar in the case of the individual self? Therefore, how can the notion of possessiveness for action and fruit cease merely by the abandonment of agency? To this he says: "for the Supreme Person...". The word "hi" (for/indeed) indicates that this is well-known in authority. He states what is well-known in passages like: "O Hari, You sport with living beings like playing balls, which go down and up as pulled by the thread of action..." and "Indeed, this world of moving and non-moving beings exists for the sake of Krishna" (Mahabharata 2.38.23), by: "with His own..." etc. Indeed, the Supreme Person is declared in scriptures as the Lord of the lords of instruments (organs). Therefore, even when the instruments are auxiliary to the individual self, the state of the Supreme Person as the principal Lord does not cease, just like the king's ownership of ornaments on elephants and horses. With this intent he says: "with His own instruments, body, and life-breaths". Since there is no limiting factor, the giving of visible and invisible fruits is also His sport; thus he says: "for the purpose of His sport". The idea is that this has been discussed in aphorisms like: "But His creation is mere sport, as in ordinary life" (Brahma Sutras 2.1.33), etc. But in the reading "for the purpose of sport, etc.", the word "etc." grasps protection of devotees, etc., which is rooted in compassion, etc. Objection: "Since scriptural action is ordained only as the worship of the Supreme Person, it is proper that the action up to its fruit belongs to Him. But worldly action is not so ordained, nor is it perceived as such, because the fruit like the removal of hunger is experienced as belonging only to the individual self; therefore, since worldly fruits are auxiliary to the individual self, it is proper that action which is the means to them is also for his sake. Hence, it is impossible to establish the abandonment of attachment for all objects by statements like 'for the accomplishment of all actions'." To this he says: "Therefore...". "of the Supreme Person alone" — the genitive case rests on the specific relationship of owned and owner. The idea is: just as the nourishment of a caged bird and its happiness, etc. are auxiliary to the emperor, so also here. By "sāṅkhye kṛtānte", the Sankhya philosophy is not intended, because God is not admitted there; and since agency is not admitted for anyone other than the instruments, the statement of division of agent and instrument in "the agent, and the various kinds of instruments" (Gita 18.14) would be impossible; and since it is opposed to the Vedas, it is improper to cite it for teaching the Truth; and even if it is not opposed, since its Vedic origin must be accepted, it rests indeed on the Veda; and by all it is agreed to abandon the conventional sense and resort to the etymological sense for the sake of propriety of meaning. Therefore, with the intent that the portion of the Vedas which is engaged in determining the Truth of things as they are is intended by the words "sankhya-kritante", he explains etymologically: "Sankhya means Buddhi (reasoning)". In accordance with the context, he qualifies Buddhi: "as they are...". What was said here by Shankara: "Sankhya is that scripture where the subject-matters are fully stated, which is Vedanta; that itself is 'kritanta', meaning that in this occurs the termination (anta) of action performed (kritam)" — that is incorrect; because the connection of action is established in Vedanta also; and when the abandonment of conventional sense is inevitable, it is proper to grasp only the most appropriate etymological sense. The word "anta" is read by lexicographers as meaning "decision" (nischaya). With the intent that this decision is qualified by the word "krita" because it is accomplished after deliberation by Buddhi, he says: "in the decision determined after due deliberations". Or, the word "decision" here refers to the determined object, because the word "kritanta", which is a synonym of "siddhanta", is conventional in the sense of the accepted meaning of each school. For this very reason, it is qualified as "determined after due deliberations". Indeed, it is not the decision itself that is to be deliberated upon. Or, the idea is: the decision of the ancients was deliberated upon by others. Or, the word "decision" here refers to the deciding text. In that case, there is connection with the word "declared". By the word "accomplishment" (siddhaye), the reaching of fruit, etc., is not intended here; because immediately after this it is said: "whatever action a man undertakes... these five are its causes" (Gita 18.15), showing the accomplishment of the form of action itself. With this intent he says: "for the production". Since "My causes" is impossible, and in the statement "causes belonging to Me" there is no connection because He who is indicated by the word "destiny" cannot belong to Himself, he states the appropriate connection: "learn from Me, i.e., from My presence". The idea is: this is for the purpose of enjoining concentration of the mind on the distinct causality of the five factors going to be mentioned according to each system. With the intent that this section is contradictory to those who do not accept the twenty-sixth principle (God) and who propound that the twenty-fifth principle (individual self) is the sole locus of superimposition of agency, he establishes that it refers to the etymological sense: "indeed, the Vedic...". "having body, senses, life-breath, and individual self as instruments" is a Bahuvrihi compound. "Instrument" (upakaranam) means the accessories taken for the sake of the intended effect.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Raising the objection: "Even if there is renunciation of attachment and fruit, the fruit is indeed expected for the performer of action, just like satisfaction from eating, or madness produced by consuming an intoxicating substance for medicine; therefore, how can there be no fruit?", He answers with five verses starting with "pañcaitāni...". O mighty-armed one who is capable of performing the action of renouncing fruits, for the accomplishment, i.e., attainment of fruits, of all actions; "sāṅkhye" means in that which decides abandonment and non-abandonment; "kritante" is that in which the termination (anta) of action performed (kritam) occurs, i.e., Vedanta; declared in that. Learn, i.e., know from Me, these five factors going to be declared hereafter.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Raising the question: "Is the contemplation of non-agency which is the cause of non-tainting of the Self by actions, artificial like looking at a woman as fire, etc., or is it real, being covered by agency superimposed by ignorance, so that by the scriptural view, with the disappearance of agency, non-agency alone is contemplated?" Refuting the first view, because by artificial non-agency — just as by looking at a woman as fire there is no perception of burning — the real non-tainting by action is impossible; and wishing to establish the second view, He prepares the ground: "panca..." (five...). O mighty-armed one, learn, i.e., understand from My words, these five factors going to be mentioned which are the producers of all actions. To generate faith in His own words, He states the authority of the causes: "declared in the Sankhya in which actions terminate". "Sankhya" is the scripture of Vedanta in which the principles of the nature of Self and non-Self are fully discriminated and declared. He qualifies it by "kritante": in which the termination (anta) of action performed (kritam) occurs. Since the termination of all actions is shown when Self-knowledge arises, in the text: "all actions in their entirety, O Arjuna, culminate in Knowledge" (Gita 4.33), they are declared in that Sankhya which is the end of actions.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O mighty-armed Arjuna, according to the Vedānta there are five causes for the accomplishment of all action. Now learn of these from Me.

 A question may be raised that since any activity performed must have some reaction, how is it that the person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness does not suffer or enjoy the reactions of work? The Lord is citing Vedānta philosophy to show how this is possible. He says that there are five causes for all activities, and for success in all activity one should consider these five causes. Sāṅkhya means the stock of knowledge, and Vedānta is the final stock of knowledge accepted by all leading ācāryas. Even Śaṅkara accepts Vedānta-sūtra as such. Therefore such authority should be consulted. The ultimate control is invested in the Supersoul. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā , sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ. He is engaging everyone in certain activities by reminding him of his past actions. And Kṛṣṇa conscious acts done under His direction from within yield no reaction, either in this life or in the life after death.