Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
anye tvevamajānantaḥ śrutvānyebhya upāsate .
te.api cātitarantyeva mṛtyuṃ śrutiparāyaṇāḥ

Word Meanings:
अन्ये - others
तु - indeed
एवम् - thus
अजानन्तः - not knowing
श्रुत्वा - having heard
अन्येभ्यः - from others
उपासते - worship
ते - they
अपि - also
च - and
अतितरन्ति - cross beyond
एव - even
मृत्युम् - death
श्रुतिपरायणाः - regarding what they have

Life Application:
Others, not knowing thus, worship by hearing from others; they too cross beyond death by devoted listening.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
But others, not knowing thus themselves, worship by hearing from others (teachers); they too, who are devoted to hearing (i.e. for whom hearing is the supreme means), undoubtedly cross beyond death.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Others also, not knowing thus, worship, having heard of It from others; they, too, cross beyond death, regarding what they have heard as the Supreme refuge.

अन्ये others? तु indeed? एवम् thus? अजानन्तः not knowing? श्रुत्वा having heard? अन्येभ्यः from others? उपासते worship? ते they? अपि also? च and? अतितरन्ति cross beyond? एव even? मृत्युम् death? श्रुतिपरायणाः regarding what they have heard as the Supreme refuge.Commentary The three paths? viz.? the Yoga of meditation? the Yoga of knowledge? and the Yoga of action to attain the knowledge of the Self were described in the previous verse. In this verse the Yoga of worship is described.Some who are ignorant of the methods described in the previous verse listen to the teachings of the spiritual preceptors regarding this great Truth or the Self with intense and unshakable faith? solely depending upon the authority of others instructions? and through constant remembrance and contemplation of them attain immortality. They are devoted to their preceptor. Some study the books written by realised seers? stick with great faith to the teachings contained therein and live according to them. They also overcome death. Whichever path one follows? one eventually attains the knowledge of the Self and final liberation from birth and death? -- salvation (Moksha). There are several paths to suit aspirants of different temperaments and eipments.Freeing oneself from ignorance with its effects through the knowledge of the Self? is crossing the Samsara or attaining immortality or overcoming death or obtaining release or salvation.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Others again, having no direct knowledge but only hearing from others, nevertheless worship, and they, too, if true to the teachings, cross the sea of death.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
After describing the paths suitable for the best and mediocre seekers, the Teacher of the Gita now explains a path for seekers of dull intellect.
Hearing from Others: There are some people who are unable to practice any of the three paths—Meditation, Sankhya, and Karma Yoga. The only way for their development is that they should hear about worship or devotion from some teacher and accordingly worship the Lord.
They too cross beyond death: It is observed in the world that those who have a dull intellect often have an abundance of faith. Therefore, if such seekers of dull intellect worship with faith in the prescribed manner, they too can cross over this impermanent, death-like world and experience the Eternal Truth. Death should not be understood merely as the end of the physical body. This word has been used here in its broader sense. By identifying with the impermanent and non-self conditionings, we too continue to be affected by their changes. This painful experience of change is called death. Knowing the Eternal and changeless Self, which is distinct from these, is crossing beyond death; that is, remaining unshaken and unaffected in all changes. Sri Shankaracharya says that if these seekers attain liberation merely by hearing the teachings of others, even though they lack discrimination themselves, then what is to be said about independent, discriminating seekers who study through valid means of knowledge? They certainly attain liberation. What is the goal to be accomplished through all these means? On this, it is said:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
But others, who have no knowledge of this nature, listen from others and practise reflection  [accordingly]  they too, being devoted to what they have heard, do cross over death.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
But some, who do not know thus, having heard from others, worship accordingly - these too, who are devoted to what they hear, pass beyond death.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Others, agian, who do not know thus, take to thinking after hearing from others; they, too, who are devoted to hearing, certainly overcome death.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'By Sankhya' means by the knowledge of the nature of the Lord declared in the Vedas. Even for the performers of action, perception (drishti) occurs by hearing, knowing, and meditating. For the hearers (shravakas), it is by knowing and meditating. And for the practitioners of Sankhya, it is by meditating. Thus says the Gaupavana Sruti: 'Having performed action and having heard about it, knowing and meditating, one perceives. The hearer also, having known and meditated, and the knower also perceives. Otherwise, his perception is in no way produced.' The word 'others' is used to show the means even for those who are incapable.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Recalling the previous statement that 'the knowledge of identity is the cause of liberation', he introduces this verse, which explains the desired cause, preceded by a question, with the words 'kshetra' etc. Since the origin of all living beings depends on the relationship between the field (Kshetra) and the knower of the field (Kshetrajna), and there is no collection of living beings apart from the Supreme Self, which is the Knower of the field, liberation occurs only from the knowledge of identity. To this he says, 'From what cause?' He objects to the stated relationship between Kshetra and Kshetrajna by saying, 'What indeed is this relation?' Asking whether the relationship of the Knower of the field with the field is conjunction (samyoga) or inherence (samavaya), he refutes the first option by saying, 'Not indeed...' He refutes the second option by saying, 'Nor...' He resolves this by saying 'It is said...', showing that despite the absence of a real relationship, there exists a relationship of the nature of superimposition (adhyasa) between them. He states the reason for their having different natures by saying, 'Because of object...' He says 'mutual' etc., to state that their union is of the form of superimposition of their respective properties—such as consciousness belonging to the Knower of the field which is not located in the field, and insentience (jadya) belonging to the field which is not based in the Knower of the field—mutually upon each other. He states the cause for this by saying, 'due to lack of discrimination...' He gives an example of the superimposed conjunction due to lack of discrimination by saying, 'like a rope...' He concludes the stated relationship by saying, 'This is that...' He indicates its capability of being removed by saying, 'false...' Anticipating the question, 'How then is false knowledge removed?', he says, 'Just as...' The connection is: one who follows the scripture regarding the meaning of the word 'tvam' (thou), such as 'He who is consisting of knowledge among the organs' etc., acquires discriminating knowledge, separates the Knower of the field—previously described as the Overseer etc.—from the field consisting of the great elements down to firmness, like drawing a stalk from the Munja grass, and experiences the knowable Brahman free from all limitations as one's own nature, his false knowledge disappears. Anticipating the doubt, 'How is the Knower of the field free from attributes, when there are reasons for it having attributes?', he says, 'And the field...' The variety of the field is shown by mentioning multiple examples. He states the reason for the removal of false knowledge through the said knowledge by saying, 'as described...' Anticipating the doubt, 'Even so, how is the human goal accomplished, when there is a possibility of the rise of similar false knowledge at a later time?', he says, 'for him...' Since liberation is established by the removal of ignorance and its effects through right knowledge, he states the result by saying, 'He who thus...'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Others, not knowing thus (the methods of Dhyana-yoga, Sankhya-yoga, Karma-yoga, etc.), worship solely by hearing from others (liberated great souls); even these persons devoted to hearing cross beyond death.

Commentary -- 'anye tvevamajanantah ... mrtyum srutiparayanah' -- There are many seekers who are eager to attain the Truth but do not understand methods like Dhyana-yoga, Sankhya-yoga, Karma-yoga, Hatha-yoga, Laya-yoga, etc., and therefore these practices do not feature in their spiritual routine. Such persons cross beyond death, i.e., attain Self-realization, simply by obeying the instructions of realized, liberated great souls. Just as one gets wealth by obeying a wealthy person, similarly, one attains Self-realization by obeying a realized sage. Yes, there is this difference: the wealthy person gives wealth only when he wishes to, but by obeying the instructions of a saintly soul, by following his mind, indications, and commands with dedication, a person automatically attains that Supreme Reality which is already naturally attained by everyone at all times. This is because wealth is under the control of the wealthy person, but the Supreme Reality is not under anyone's control. Death occurs only by maintaining a relationship with the body. When a person becomes devoted to the instructions of great souls, their assumed relationship with the body ceases. Thus they cross beyond death; that is, they free themselves from the false belief that they die when the body dies.
There are three classes of such seekers who are devoted to hearing:
1 -- If the seeker has no desire for worldly pleasures, has an intense longing only for Self-realization, and the person whose instructions they follow is an experienced sage, then the seeker attains God very quickly.
2 -- If the seeker still has some desire for pleasure, then simply by obeying the instructions of the great soul, that desire will be destroyed and they will attain God.
3 -- If the person whose instructions they follow is not an experienced sage, but the seeker has no worldly desire whatsoever and their sole aim is to attain God, then by the grace of God they will attain Him, because God knows their heart.
If for some reason the seeker develops lack of faith or finds faults in the saintly sage, then they will see only faults in him and no virtues. The reason is that great souls are raised above virtues and faults (gunatita); hence, if there is lack of faith, one's own attitude is projected onto them. The attitude with which a person looks at something determines their relationship with it. Seeing faults establishes a relationship with faults. Therefore, a seeker should not focus on the actions or conduct of the realized sage, but should remain detached in his presence. A person who maintains only a spiritual connection with a saintly sage, rather than any worldly transaction, can derive the greatest benefit. Secondly, the seeker must ensure that he never criticizes that great soul anywhere. If he criticizes him, he will make no progress anywhere.
Connection -- In the previous verse, it was said that even seekers devoted to hearing cross beyond death. Now, a question arises: What is the cause of death? The Lord answers this in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
But some, namely, those who are not alified for Karma Yoga etc., for realising the self, listen to Jnanins who know the truth, and meditate on the self through Karma Yoga, etc. - they too pass beyond death. It means that those who are devoted to what they hear only, even they, intent on hearing and devoid of evils, begin in due course, the practice of Karma Yoga etc., and pass beyond death. By the term 'too' (api), the difference in levels is made out.

Now, in order to teach the contemplation on the distinctness of the self conjoined with the Prakrti, he says that all entities, movables and immovables, are the product of combination between the conscient and the non-conscient:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Dhyanena etc., Anye etc.  A  knowledge of this sort is the main.  [For this end]  some practise religious meditation of the Self as Self; others [try] by means of the Sankhya  (knowledge) mentioned already  (Ch. V, 5ff),  while still others  [strive] through action.  Still others, bent upon hearing [from the preceptors etc.]  practise the religious meditation as they have heard, even though they do not themselves know, (have) the knowledge of this kind.  They too cross over the death,  i.e., the cycyle of birth and death.  What is conveyed here is this :  The category Bhagavat, if mentally reflected upon by one means or the other, does transport across [the ocean of death circle]. Therefore , let one remain in this fashion by all means.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Anye tu, others again; ajanantah, who do not know the Self as described above; evam, thus, even in one of these alternative ways; upasate, take to thinking, take to reflection, being imbued with faith; srutva, after hearing; anyhyah, from others, from the teachers, having been told, 'Think only of this.' Te api ca, they, too; sruti-parayanah, who are devoted to hearing, to whom hearing is the supreme course, the best discipline for starting on the path to Liberation, i.e., those who, themselves lacking in discrimination, accept only others' advice as most authoritative; eva, certainly; ati-taranti, overcome; mrtyum, death, i.e. the mundane existence which is fraught with death.
The implication is; It goes without saying that those discriminating people who are idenpendent in the application of the valid means of knowledge, cross over death.
That the knowledge of the identity of the Knower of the field and God leads to Liberation has been stated in, '৷৷.by realizing which one attains Immortality' (12). For what reason is it so? To point out that reason the (next) verse is begun:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
On the statement 'Others by Sankhya yoga', the interpretation that 'Sankhya' means the knowledge of discrimination between Prakriti and Purusha as taught in Kapila's system is incorrect. This is because Kapila's system, being non-Vedic, cannot be accepted here, and it cannot be the primary means of seeing the Lord. Keeping this in mind, [the commentator] explains it differently by 'Sankhyena', which means by knowledge, i.e., indirect knowledge. Regarding the statement 'by meditation', to refute the misconception that meditation alone is stated as the means to see the Lord, he says 'of the performers of action...'. The word 'drishtih' (vision/perception) is to be supplied as the remainder. The statements are in reverse order of recitation because the logical order of meaning is primary. Why is this so? To this he says, 'And thus...'. The word 'meditating' is also connected with the subsequent word 'knower also'. Now, if everything is combined everywhere, there would be only one method, and then the statements 'some', 'others', 'yet others' would be inappropriate. To this he says, 'Others...'. The meaning is that the word 'others' is spoken by taking resort to the difference in stages, to show the respective means like knowledge even for those who are directly unable to practice the higher means like meditation.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Others again' etc. Seekers of very dull qualification hear from others, i.e. the knowers of the truth, and worship the Self through means like action (Gita 3.20) etc. Consequently, they too, by realizing the Self, cross over death, which is the cycle of births and deaths; namely, those who are devoted to hearing. By the use of the words 'api' (too) and 'cha' (and), the distinction from the previous categories is understood.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He states the means of knowledge for those of even duller intellect with 'Others again...'. The word 'tu' (but) is used to show the distinction from the three types of qualified seekers mentioned in the previous verse. 'Others' indeed refers to those of duller intellect. Not knowing the Self described above in even one of these alternative ways, they hear from compassionate teachers who instruct them, 'Meditate on this in this manner,' and being endowed with faith, they worship, i.e., meditate. They too cross over death, i.e., the cycle of births and deaths; namely, those who are devoted to hearing, who, though incapable of independent reflection themselves, are solely devoted to hearing the instructions of the Guru with faith. The use of the word 'api' (too) in 'they too' implies that it goes without saying that those who are capable of independent reflection cross over death.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He states the means of deliverance for those of very dull qualification with 'Others...'. But others, not knowing how to directly realize the Self characterized as the Overseer etc. through paths like Sankhya and Yoga, hear from other teachers by way of instruction and worship, i.e., meditate. And they, being devoted to hearing the instruction with faith, gradually cross over death, i.e., the cycle of births and deaths.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He speaks of those of even duller intellect with 'Others again...'. The word 'tu' (but) is used to show the distinction from the previous ones. Not knowing the Self described above in even one of these alternatives, those who are devoted to hearing—meaning those for whom hearing is the supreme path, the highest means for engaging in the path of liberation, and who, lacking discrimination themselves, accept only others' advice as authoritative—hear from other teachers who say, 'Meditate only on this,' and being endowed with faith, worship, i.e., meditate on that. They too certainly cross over, i.e., transcend the cycle of births and deaths which is fraught with death. The word 'cha' (and) is for joining with the previously mentioned ones. The word 'api' (too) is used for the sake of showing the logic of 'how much more so' (kaimutya-nyaya) that if these also cross over, then what is to be said about the three previously mentioned categories crossing over? The word 'eva' (certainly) is to determine that there is no doubt about their crossing over the cycle of births and deaths, even though they lack the qualifications mentioned first.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The stage of beginning Karma Yoga for seekers of liberation who have not accomplished Karma Yoga is described. By the word 'tu' (but) in 'Others again' and by 'not knowing thus', their lack of qualification for Karma Yoga etc. due to the absence of their own power of discrimination is indicated. By 'from others', referencing those who instruct, the previously mentioned 'the wise who have realized the truth will instruct you in knowledge' (Gita 4.34) is intended; hence the commentator says 'from the knowers of truth, the Jnanins'. By the words 'they too' etc., those who are incapable even of beginning Karma Yoga are indicated; hence he says 'they too...'. Or, this sentence may be connected with the preceding one as 'and those who are devoted to hearing', indicating another sentence. He shows this by 'those who are devoted to hearing'. Those for whom hearing is the supreme refuge or dedication are 'devoted to hearing'. The term 'devoted to hearing' distinguishes them from those who worship merely after hearing; otherwise, even if 'hearing' were said, the word 'devoted' would be redundant. Hence he says 'those dedicated solely to hearing'. Here, the purifying nature and excellence of devotion to hearing is intended; hence he says 'those devoted to hearing, having their sins purified'. By the words 'in due course' etc., the objection of the futility of the injunctions of Karma Yoga etc. is avoided. Why should this not be considered a separate, different means? To this he says, 'From the word api (too)...'. By the word 'api', the certainty of the others (how much more so) and the fact that these are established in a lower stage is indicated. This is the idea.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
'Others again' means fools who, not knowing themselves, hear from other Gurus without any personal experience, and worship, i.e., perform worship in the ways mentioned above. They too, all of them, certainly cross over death and become united, this is the meaning. How is this so? To this he says, 'devoted to hearing', meaning because they follow the path declared in the scriptures and act with faith. The meaning is this: 'To make my own words true, I deliver them too out of obligation, and not out of affection.' This is expressed by the words 'eva' (certainly) and 'api' (too) here.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He states another alternative view with 'Others again...'. 'Others' refers to those who lack the skill of reasoning and inquiry. By the word 'tu' (but), they are shown to be distinct from the previously mentioned ones. Not knowing the previously mentioned paths, they hear from other teachers, understand that the Self is of the nature of attribute-less Brahman-consciousness and learn the path of its worship, and worship, i.e., meditate in the prescribed manner. They too certainly cross over death, i.e., the cycle of births and deaths. From the word 'api' (too), it is understood that if these also cross over, then there is no wonder that those mentioned in the previous verse cross over. By the word 'eva' (certainly), there is no doubt about their crossing over, even though they lack the primary systematic order. This is because they are devoted to hearing; for them, hearing (shravana) itself is the supreme path, the means of liberation. Due to their intense engagement in meditation, they do not require action (karma) for the purification of the mind. And due to their firm conviction in the truth declared in the Vedas, they require hearing and reflection to remove improbability.
Some say that this realization of Brahman is of the nature of a 'convergent error' (samvadi-bhrama). Others say it is of the nature of valid knowledge (prama). For instance, just as someone seeing the luster of a gem and mistaking it for the gem itself is indeed mistaken, yet obtains the gem upon reaching for it, which is called a 'convergent error'; similarly, one who contemplates on the meaning of 'tvam' (thou), which is the luster of the entity 'tat' (that), with the notion of 'tat', is indeed mistaken from the worldly standpoint, yet at the time of realization, the direct perception of the non-different 'tat' entity occurs by the analogy of the 'convergent error'. Thus says Vasistha: 'O holy one, an eternal truth is seen in what is untrue from the worldly view. By a void meditation-yoga, the eternal state is attained.' The meaning of Vasistha's statement is: although the attribute-less Self is untrue from the worldly viewpoint of attributes, yet the contemplation of attribute-lessness there is a void or objectless meditation-yoga, like meditating on fire in a woman; nevertheless, by this, the eternal truth is attained and realized. But the Kalpadruma acharyas say: 'The direct perception born from the contemplation of the meaning of Upanishadic sentences is established as error-free due to the firmness of the root authority.'

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual knowledge, begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Him from others. Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, they also transcend the path of birth and death.

 This verse is particularly applicable to modern society because in modern society there is practically no education in spiritual matters. Some of the people may appear to be atheistic or agnostic or philosophical, but actually there is no knowledge of philosophy. As for the common man, if he is a good soul, then there is a chance for advancement by hearing. This hearing process is very important. Lord Caitanya, who preached Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the modern world, gave great stress to hearing because if the common man simply hears from authoritative sources he can progress, especially, according to Lord Caitanya, if he hears the transcendental vibration Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. It is stated, therefore, that all men should take advantage of hearing from realized souls and gradually become able to understand everything. The worship of the Supreme Lord will then undoubtedly take place. Lord Caitanya has said that in this age no one needs to change his position, but one should give up the endeavor to understand the Absolute Truth by speculative reasoning. One should learn to become the servant of those who are in knowledge of the Supreme Lord. If one is fortunate enough to take shelter of a pure devotee, hear from him about self-realization and follow in his footsteps, one will be gradually elevated to the position of a pure devotee. In this verse particularly, the process of hearing is strongly recommended, and this is very appropriate. Although the common man is often not as capable as so-called philosophers, faithful hearing from an authoritative person will help one transcend this material existence and go back to Godhead, back to home.