Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
na hi prapaśyāmi mamāpanudyād yacchokamucchoṣaṇamindriyāṇām .
avāpya bhūmāvasapatnamṛddhaṃ rājyaṃ surāṇāmapi cādhipatyam

Word Meanings:
न हि - not
प्रपश्यामि - I see
मम - my
अपनुद्यात् - would remove
यत् - that
शोकम् - grief
उच्छोषणम् - drying up
इन्द्रियाणाम् - of my senses
अवाप्य - having obtained
भूमौ - on the earth
असपत्नम् - unrivalled
ऋद्धम् - prosperous
राज्यम् - dominion
सुराणाम् - over the gods
अपि - even
च - and
आधिपत्यम् - lordship.

Life Application:
Recognize that external status or material wealth cannot cure deep emotional grief or inner existential confusion.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Even attaining an unrivalled and prosperous kingdom on earth, and even lordship over the gods, I do not see what could remove this grief that is drying up my senses.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
I do not see that it would remove this sorrow that burns up my senses, even if I should attain prosperous and unrivalled dominion on earth or lordship over the gods.

न हि not? प्रपश्यामि I see? मम my? अपनुद्यात् would remove? यत् that? शोकम् grief? उच्छोषणम् drying up? इन्द्रियाणाम् of my senses? अवाप्य having obtained? भूमौ on the earth? असपत्नम् unrivalled? ऋद्धम् prosperous? राज्यम् dominion? सुराणाम् over the gods? अपि even? च and? आधिपत्यम् lordship.No commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
For should I attain the monarchy of the visible world, or over the invisible world, it would not drive away the anguish which is now paralysing my senses."

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Here Arjuna indicates that he needs guidance immediately, in whose absence he must endure inner anguish. He feels unable even to express the cause of this anguish. This grief is affecting his very sense organs as well — he can neither see properly nor hear properly.

It is natural for any thoughtful person, when a problem arises, to become impatient to resolve it, desiring to quickly solve the problem and attain peace. Poor Arjuna made great effort to solve the problem through his own intellect, but could not succeed. As is clear from his own words, his sorrow is now not for the sake of gaining material things — for he himself says that even obtaining sovereignty over the whole earth or heaven cannot remove his grief.

Arjuna's condition is now like that of an intense seeker of liberation, impatient to be freed from all the limitations and bonds of mortal life. What is needed now is only an authentic teaching, which the Lord Hrishikesha Himself gives him in the divine poem of the Gita.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
I do not clearly see what would drive out my grief,  the scorcher of my sense-organs,  even after achieving,  a prosperous and unrivalled kingship in this earth and also the overlordship of the gods  [in the heaven].

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Even if I should win unchallenged sovereignty of a prosperous earth or even the kingdom on lordship over the Devas, I do not feel that it would dispel the grief than withers up my senses.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Because, I do not see that which can, even after aciring on this earth a prosperous kingdom free from enemies and even sovereignty over the gods, remove my sorrow (which is) blasting the senses.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Why do you desire liberation alone? He states, in 'Na hi...': for what reason do I not see, do you ask. I do not see what would remove, dispel, this grief, this burning, of my senses. One might object: on slaying the enemy and obtaining the kingdom, will your grief not cease? Anticipating this, he says, in 'Avapya...': a kingdom in which no rival exists, firmly established, whose royal duty is protection and governance of subjects — even attaining this on this earth, I do not see it as a cause for removing grief, is the sense. Then, will the attainment of Indra's very status remove your grief? Anticipating this, he says, in 'Suranam api...': their overlordship, sovereignty, the status of Indra or of Brahma — even attaining that, my grief would not depart, is the sense.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Even attaining a prosperous, enemy-free kingdom on earth and lordship over the gods in heaven, I do not see that this grief, which is drying up my senses, would thereby depart.

Explanation: 'Avapya bhumavasapatnamriddham rajyam' — even if I obtain a wealthy, thornless kingdom, one in which the subjects are utterly happy and prosperous with no enemies, still my grief cannot be removed. 'Suranam api cha adhipatyam' — let alone such a paltry earthly kingdom, even Indra's kingdom of divine pleasures, if obtained, could not remove my grief, my burning, my anxiety.

Arjuna had earlier said in the first chapter that he desires neither victory nor kingdom nor happiness, since those for whose sake we desire kingdom, pleasure and life itself stand here ready to die (1.32-33). There, it was excessive familial attachment that made Arjuna withdraw from battle; but here, his withdrawal arises from a wish for his own true good.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Thus, having begun the battle, one might argue: 'the sons of Dhritarashtra, ceasing their hostile activity, will nonetheless be slain violently by us' -- so be it; but since we, not knowing what is dharma and what is adharma, would gain victory through their slaying, and that victory would itself be unrighteous, it seems to me that being slain by them is actually the better course. Having said this, Arjuna, exceedingly humbled, approached the lotus feet of the Lord, saying: tell me, Your surrendered disciple, what is truly good for me, as You have ascertained it.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
On 'Karpanya...' and the rest: through the words beginning 'between the two armies' and the rest, it is indicated that Arjuna, overcome with doubt, has not merely ceased fighting through one particular line of reasoning; and it is precisely for this reason that he says 'instruct me, who have taken refuge in You.' Hence he is being taught by the Blessed Lord as one caught between both knowledge and ignorance.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Three verses beginning with 'Na chaitad...' pose a question. Their meaning is self-evident.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
One might object: decide for yourself what is truly good, since you are learned in scripture — why depend on another as teacher? Anticipating this, he says: I do not see what, having been attained as the truly good, would remove, dispel, my grief. Since I do not see this, therefore instruct me — this is shown by the shruti's sense: 'I grieve, O Lord; may the Lord carry me across the far shore of this grief.' Lest it be thought there is no fault in leaving this grief unremoved, he qualifies it: 'the drying up of the senses' — meaning it is a perpetual torment. One might further object: will your grief not cease if you strive in battle — through attaining the kingdom if victorious, or through attaining heaven otherwise, per the dharma-shastra's 'these two men in the world...'? Anticipating this, he says, beginning with 'Avapya...': an enemy-free, grain-rich kingdom, and lordship over the gods up to the status of Hiranyagarbha — even attaining these, I do not see what would remove my grief, is the construction. For scripture says: 'as a world earned by action here perishes, so too a world earned by merit there perishes.' By the inference 'whatever is produced is impermanent,' and by direct perception of the destruction of earthly things as well — neither worldly nor otherworldly enjoyment truly removes grief; rather, being dependent on enjoyment even during its existence, and subject to separation even at the time of its destruction, it is itself a cause of grief. Hence battle should not be undertaken merely for the removal of grief, is the sense. By this, dispassion toward enjoyment in this world and the next is shown as a qualification of the aspirant.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
One might object: decide for yourself what is proper, and act accordingly — anticipating this, he says, in 'Na hi...': that action which would remove, dispel, my grief, which is exceedingly drying up my senses, I do not see. Even if I should attain a thornless, prosperous kingdom on earth, and even if I should attain the very status of Indra — having attained all that is desired, I still do not see any means of removing my grief, is the construction.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
One might object: for you, the victor, having obtained a kingdom on earth, or having attained, through your own dharma or as Indra's son, lordship over the gods, will not something readily available remove even the grief of ignorance? Anticipating this, he says, in 'Na hi...': a kingdom on earth in which no rival exists, that is, thornless, prosperous with grain and the like, or lordship over the gods — even attaining this, I do not see what would remove my grief, which is an extreme drying up of my senses, is the construction. Hence it is You alone who must now remove this grief, is the implication. Why do you desire liberation alone? He says, in 'Na hi...': for what reason I do not see what would remove my grief, the drying up of my senses. One might object: on slaying the enemy and obtaining the kingdom, will your grief not cease? Anticipating this, he says, in 'Avapya...': a kingdom in which no rival exists, whose royal duty is protection and governance of subjects — even attaining this, I do not see it as removing grief, is the sense. Then will attaining Indra's very status remove your grief? Anticipating this, he says, in 'Suranam api...': their overlordship, whether the status of Indra or of Brahma — even attaining that, my grief would not depart, say others.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
On 'Na chaitad vidmah' and the rest, he states the intended purport, preceded by the doubt indicated by the word 'cha,' in 'Evam...': it is implied that you, fearing the destruction of your kinsmen, would in fact be causing the destruction of your very closest kinsmen -- Dharmaraja, Bhima, Nakula and the rest -- through your own hesitation. Following the plural form used in 'vidmah' and the rest, he says 'asmakam' (of us): by this word 'asmakam,' it is implied that all are equally disciples, in relation to Bhishma, Drona and the rest who have been designated as fit to be slain. Through the first and second halves of the verse, two doubts reflecting his own preferred positions are indicated. The words 'yadva' and 'yadi va' carry the same sense. The construction of 'yan eva...' and the rest is: those very persons by whose slaying our own life would become undesirable, they themselves, desiring to slay us, stand arrayed there in a manner corresponding to their own slaying [of us]. Through 'na jijivishamah' (we do not wish to live), he expresses the state of mind, culminating in indecision, that is the very cause of his questioning, in 'iti me pratibhati' (thus it appears to me). He then clarifies the qualities of the disciple that render him fit for instruction, as conveyed by the resultant sense of 'yach chhreyah' and the rest, in 'yan mahyam...': the word 'iti' serves the purpose of drawing out a definite conclusion. For a disciple is one who is to be instructed; hence he says, 'I am your disciple; instruct me.' Here, his innate temperament is steadfastness; or, owing to his lack of knowledge regarding the particulars of duty, or owing to his lack of any means to dispel his grief, there is excessive humility. Some say that not abandoning what ought to be abandoned constitutes this humility here; others say it is being absorbed in a pitiable, compassion-evoking state. That he 'approached the lotus feet of the Lord' is itself the fruit of his being established as a disciple, surrendered to the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
One might object: since You are my friend and I have taken refuge in You, I should act only according to Your wish — anticipating this, he says, in 'Na hi...': having attained a rival-free, unique, pure kingdom on earth abounding in all splendor, and having attained elsewhere even Indra's own sovereignty over the gods, there is nothing that could quench, that could fulfill the longing of, my senses; hence I do not see what would remove my grief. What then shall I petition for? — this is the sense. The word 'hi' is used appropriately here, since the senses are notoriously insatiable.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
One might object: has it not already been said, 'abandoning this petty weakness of heart, arise, O Parantapa' — that battle alone is the true good? Why then do you ask again? Anticipating this, he says, in 'Na hi...': the grief caused by the destruction of my kinsmen would not be removed by the attainment of a kingdom nor by the attainment of heavenly sovereignty; hence, tell me some other means of pacification, some form of cessation, other than battle — this is the intent. Here, under the guise of Arjuna's despondency, the qualifications of one fit for the knowledge of Brahman are shown: the practice of begging alms, and dispassion toward the fruits of enjoyment both in this world and the next.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my senses. I will not be able to dispel it even if I win a prosperous, unrivaled kingdom on earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.

 Although Arjuna was putting forward so many arguments based on knowledge of the principles of religion and moral codes, it appears that he was unable to solve his real problem without the help of the spiritual master, Lord Sri Krishna. He could understand that his so-called knowledge was useless in driving away his problems, which were drying up his whole existence; and it was impossible for him to solve such perplexities without the help of a spiritual master like Lord Krishna. Academic knowledge, scholarship, high position, etc., are all useless in solving the problems of life; help can be given only by a spiritual master like Krishna.