Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
bhayādraṇāduparataṃ maṃsyante tvāṃ mahārathāḥ .
yeṣāṃ ca tvaṃ bahumato bhūtvā yāsyasi lāghavam

Word Meanings:
भयात् - from fear
रणात् - from the battle
उपरतम् - withdrawn
मंस्यन्ते - will think
त्वाम् - thee
महारथाः - great chariot-warriors
येषाम् - of whom
च - and
त्वम् - thou
बहुमतः - held in high esteem
भूत्वा - having been
यास्यसि - will receive
लाघवम् - lightness.

Life Application:
Do not let cowardice masquerade as virtue when fear tempts you to retreat from necessary commitments.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The great warriors will think that you have withdrawn from battle out of fear; and you, who were highly esteemed by them, will fall into insignificance in their eyes.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The great car-warriors will think that thou hast withdrawn from the battle through fear; and thou wilt be lightly held by them who have thought much of thee.

भयात् from fear? रणात् from the battle? उपरतम् withdrawn? मंस्यन्ते will think? त्वाम् thee? महारथाः the great carwarriors? येषाम् of whom? च and? त्वम् thou? बहुमतः much thought of? भूत्वा having been? यास्यसि will receive? लाघवम् lightness.Commentary Duryodhana and others will certainly think that you have fled from the battle from fear of Karna and others? but not through compassion and reverence for elders and teachers. Duryodhana and others who have shown great esteem to you on account of your chivalry? bravery and other noble alities? will think very lightly of you and treat you with contempt.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Great generals will think that thou hast fled from the battlefield through cowardice; though once honoured thou wilt seem despicable.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Not only will your infamy endure in the annals of history to come, but even now these great warriors on the enemy side will mock you. Failing to understand the grief you feel over this fratricidal war, they will simply conclude that you fled the battle out of fear and cowardice. No brave man can bear such a disrespectful charge of cowardice, especially when it comes from enemies of equal might. Moreover -

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The mighty charioteers will  think of you as having withdrawn from the battle out of fear :  having been highly regarded by these men,  you shall be viewed lightly.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The great warriors will think that you have fled from battle in fear. These men who held you in high esteem will speak lightly of you now.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The great chariot-riders will think of you as having desisted from the fight out of fear; and you will into disgrace before them to whom you had been estimable.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Furthermore, that battle must be waged by you for this reason too is indicated by the word 'moreover.' Anticipating the doubt 'I will not fight, out of compassion for these beings,' he explains with the word 'out of fear.' He specifies precisely who the great warriors are with the phrase 'to whom.' The purport is that taking up arms is unavoidable, in order to dispel the ridicule that Duryodhana and the others would otherwise heap upon you.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The great warriors will think that you have withdrawn from the battle out of fear. In the eyes of those to whom you have been held in high esteem, you will fall into insignificance.

Explanation - 'bhayadranaduparatam mamsyante tvam maharathah' - You may think that you are withdrawing from the battle only for your own good; but if that were truly so, and if you regarded war as sinful, you would have retired to solitude and taken to remembrance of God long ago, and would never have set out for battle at all. But you did not remain in solitude - you engaged yourself in the war. Now, if you turn back from it, the great warriors will simply conclude that Arjuna withdrew from battle out of fear of being killed. Had he been guided by considerations of dharma, he would not have withdrawn, since fighting is the duty of a Kshatriya. Hence he must be withdrawing purely out of fear of death.
'yesam ca tvam bahumato bhutva yasyasi laghavam' - Bhishma, Dronacharya, Kripacharya, Shalya and other great warriors hold you in high esteem; that is, they firmly believe that Arjuna is the most renowned hero in battle, one who has already defeated many demons, gods and gandharvas. If you now withdraw from the fight, you will fall into insignificance before these great warriors - you will be diminished in their eyes.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Great warriors like Karna, Duryodhana, etc., hitherto held you in high esteem as a heroic enemy. Now by refraining from battle when it has begun, you will appear to them as despicable and easily defeatable. These great warriors will think of you as withdrawing from battle out of fear. Because turning away from battle does not happen in the case of brave enemies through affection etc., for relatives. It can happen only through fear of enemies.

Moreover

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 2.33–2.37 jointly): Atha ca etc., upto krta-niscavah.  Accepting what the opponent has stated, this pentad of verses is narrated as an argument : 'If your goodself prefers to abide by the generally accepted practice, even then this [fighting] must be undertaken necessarily'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Moreover, maharathah, the great chariot-riders, Duryodhana and others; mamsyante, will think; tvam, of you; as uparatam, having desisted; ranat, from the fight; not out of compassion, but bhayat, out of fear of Karna and others; ca, and ; yasyasi laghavam, you will again fall into disgrace before them, before Duryodhana and others; yesam, to whom; tvam, you; bahumato bhutva, had been estimable as endowed with many alities.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Although you refrain from battle out of fear of the fault of slaying your own kinsmen, these warriors will not understand it that way - this is expressed by 'withdrawn from battle out of fear.' Not knowing your true reason, these great warriors will think you have withdrawn from the fight out of fear of death, and thus you will fall into insignificance.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
If it be objected: let indifferent people condemn me, but great warriors like Bhishma and Drona, being compassionate, will instead praise me - to this he replies: great warriors such as Bhishma, Drona and Duryodhana will think you withdrew from battle out of fear of Karna and others, not out of compassion. If it be asked how they, who hold you in such high regard, could think you afraid, he explains: it is precisely because Bhishma and the others have held you in high esteem, believing Arjuna endowed with many great qualities, that these very warriors will conclude you withdrew out of fear. Hence, having been so regarded, you will fall into insignificance, that is, become an object of disrespect, in the eyes of all - those very ones who once held you in high esteem will now hold you cheap.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover, those very persons by whom you were formerly esteemed for your many virtues will think that you have withdrawn from the battle out of fear, and thus, having once been highly regarded, you will now fall into insignificance.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
It is not only other beings who will speak of your infamy, but the great warriors as well, as expressed by 'out of fear.' They will think you withdrew from battle out of fear of Karna and others, not out of compassion. Having been esteemed for your many qualities, you will now fall into insignificance.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Thus the confusion between righteousness and unrighteousness has been dispelled. Now the misplaced affection is refuted, beginning with 'out of fear.' The idea is that if I, though brave, withdraw out of affection and compassion for kinsmen, that itself would bring me only fame. By the word 'to whom,' the well-known figures Karna, Duryodhana and others are indicated, thereby recalling to mind that hostile faction. Though Bhishma and the others might know the truth of the matter, Karna and the rest would not - this is the sense. The past tense implied in 'having been' combined with the future 'you will become' is used, on the analogy of expressions like 'having bathed, I shall offer oblations,' to dispel any confusion regarding the relation between the earlier and later time in respect of the action. Since 'much esteemed' means regarded as possessed of many good qualities, he explains it as 'brave' and 'an enemy worth reckoning with.' If you were previously without enmity though brave, or brave-less though an enemy, the great warriors would not have counted you at all - this is the idea. The word 'now' indicates the continuation of enmity up to this very moment. The result of falling into insignificance is being lightly regarded, expressed figuratively by the word 'laghavam.' Being lightly regarded here means being an object of others' loose or dismissive estimation. He refutes the doubt raised earlier about withdrawing purely out of affection for kinsmen with the words 'for brave men indeed.' The idea is that unless either bravery or enmity were absent, no other explanation for withdrawal would be tenable.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
If it be objected: those who have already witnessed my valor will not speak so - only the ignorant will, and what does it matter what they say - he replies with the word 'out of fear.' The great warriors will think you withdrew from the battle out of fear. If it be asked, since I have no fear, what does it matter even if they think so, he answers with the phrase 'and to whom you...': having been esteemed by them as possessed of noble qualities, you will now fall into insignificance.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He speaks precisely of this infamy with the word 'out of fear.' Having been highly esteemed and naturally praiseworthy in conduct, you will fall into insignificance, that is, into a state called cowardice, before those very great warriors who will think that you withdrew from the battle out of fear.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will think that you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thus they will consider you insignificant.

 Lord Kṛṣṇa continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: “Do not think that the great generals like Duryodhana, Karṇa and other contemporaries will think that you have left the battlefield out of compassion for your brothers and grandfather. They will think that you have left out of fear for your life. And thus their high estimation of your personality will go to hell.”