Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
brahmabhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati .
samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu madbhaktiṃ labhate parām

Word Meanings:
ब्रह्मभूतः - having become Brahman
प्रसन्नात्मा - serene soul
न - not
शोचति - grieves
न - not
काङ्क्षति - desires
समः - equal
सर्वेषु - all
भूतेषु - in beings
मद्भक्तिम् - devotion unto Me
लभते - obtains
पराम् - supreme.

Life Application:
Becoming Brahman, serene in Self, he neither grieves nor desires; equal to all beings, he gains supreme devotion to God.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Becoming Brahman, serene-minded, he neither grieves nor desires; being the same to all beings, he obtains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Becoming Brahman, serene in the Self, he neither grieves nor desires, the same to all beings, he obtains supreme devotion to Me.

ब्रह्मभूतः having become Brahman? प्रसन्नात्मा sereneminded? न not? शोचति (he) grieves? न not? काङ्क्षति desires? समः the same? सर्वेषु all? भूतेषु in beings? मद्भक्तिम् devotion unto Me? लभते obtains? पराम् supreme.Commentary Brahmabhutah Having attained to Brahman. His attainment of perfect freedom or oneness with the Supreme is described in the next verse.He is tranilminded. He is in a state of balance and eanimity. There is nothing connected with the little personality that may cause him to grieve or prompt him to feel desire. When this state is attained? the multiplicity of objects gradually disappears and he perceives only unity everywhere. The waking and dream consciousness that gives rise to false knowledge gradually passes away.He does not grieve about his bodily wants. If he fails in his attempt to fulfil them? he does not grieve either. He always keeps evenness of mind in success and failure. He has no longing for any object that is not attained.Na sochati na kankshati can also be interpreted as he neither grieves nor exults.Samah sarveshu bhuteshu may also mean he puts himself in the position of others and feels for others. If anyone is in acute agony or distress? he himself feels that he is affected. His heart is very tender and soft. He is extremely compassionate and merciful. He considers that the pleasure and pain of all beings are his own. If others rejoice he also rejoices if others are in distress? he also is distressed. His heart is so much expanded that he feels for all. Jealousy? narrowness of heart? pettymindedness? the idea of separateness? all barriers that separate man from man? prejudices of all sorts and dislike for others -- all vanished in toto. He has cosmic love. He is a cosmic benefactor. He is the friend of all. This state of expansion is beyond description. One has to experience it for oneself. Such a devotee or aspirant attains supreme devotion to Me? the fourth or the highest of the four kinds of devotion mentioned in verse 16 of chapter VII? viz.? devotion of knowledge of the man of wisdom. (Cf.II.70)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
And when he becomes one with the Eternal, and his soul knows the bliss that belongs to the Self, he feels no desire and no regret, he regards all beings equally and enjoys the blessing of supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Becoming Brahman, serene-minded, he neither grieves nor desires; being the same toward all beings, he attains supreme devotion to Me. Commentary: Quietening the mind by abandoning egoism leads to serene peace (Prasannatma). The seeker identified with the Self does not crave (na kankshati) or grieve (na sochati) for temporary worldly objects, since his joy is independent of external things. Seeing the same Self in all beings (samah sarvesu bhutesu), he becomes eligible for the highest love (Para Bhakti), which is complete identification and oneness with the Lord.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Having become the Brahman, the serene-minded one neither grieves nor rejoices; remaining eal to all beings, he gains the highest devotion to Me.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Having realised the state of Brahman, tranil, he neither grieves nor craves. Regarding all beings alike, he attains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
One who has become Brahman and has attained the blissful Self does not grieve or desire. Becoming the same towards all beings, he attains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having become Brahman and attained the serenity of the Self, he neither grieves for any loss nor desires what is unattained. Beholding the Self equally in all beings, he attains the supreme devotion to Me (the fourth class of devotion, which is knowledge).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Becoming Brahman, serene in the Self, he neither grieves nor desires; regarding all beings equally, he attains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary: When the attraction to perishable things ceases, the egoistic tendencies dissolve and natural tranquility prevails. This state of self-absorption is called Brahmabhuta (established in Brahman). Being established in the Divine, the seeker is constantly cheerful. He does not grieve over worldly losses, nor does he crave any objects or situations. Seeing the Self in all beings, he becomes completely free from attachment and hatred, thereby attaining supreme devotion (Para Bhakti) to the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Having realised the state of Brahman,' means having got from revelation an understanding of the nature of the self as consisting of unlimited knowledge and of being a Sesa (subservient being) to Me. Subservience to Me has been posited in, 'Know that which is other than this (Prakrti or lower Nature) to be the higher Prakrti of Mine' (7.5). One who is 'tranil' means one who is not contaminated by various forms of grief (the five Klesas of Yoga-sutras), and does not grieve about any being other than Myself, nor desires anything other than Myself. On the other hand, he becomes eally indifferent to all beings other than Myself as worthless as straw and attains supreme Bhakti for Me. He attains 'supreme devotion' to Me, which is of the form of an experience which makes Me dear beyond all description - Me the Lord of all, to whom creation, protection and dissolution of the universe is a sport, who is devoid of the slightest trace of evil, who is the sole seat of countless hosts of auspicious attributes which are excellent and unlimited; and who is the ocean of the elixir of beauty; who is the Lord of Sri; who is Lotus-eyed; and who is the self's own Lord.

Sri Krsna declares the fruits of this (devotion):

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Brahma-bhutah, one who has become Brahman, attained Brahman through the above process; and prasanna-atma, [Prasada means the manifestation of the supreme Bliss of the Self as a result of the total cessation of all evils. Prasanna-atma is one who has attained this in the present life itself.] has attained the blissful Self, the indwelling Self; na, does not; socati, grieve-does not lament for the loss of something or the lack of some ality in oneself; nor kanksati, desire. By saying 'he does not grieve nor desire', this nature of one who has attained Brahman is being restated. For it does not stand to reason that in the case of a knower of Brahman there can be any hankering for something unattained. Or, (in place of kanksati) teh reading may be na hrsyati, does not become elated.
Becoming samah, the same; sarvesu bhutesu, towards all being-i.e., he verily judges what is happiness and sorrow in all beings by the same standard as he would apply to himself (cf. 6.32); but the meaning is not 'seeing the Self alike in all beings', for this will be spoken of in (the next verse), 'Through devotion he knows Me'-; he, the one who is of this kind and steadfast in Knowledge, labhate, attains; param, supreme; madbhaktim, devotion to Me, to the supreme Lord; (he attains) devotion which is described as Knowledge, as the 'fourth' in, '৷৷.four classes of people৷৷.adore Me' (7.16).
Then,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Having realized his nature, he gains supreme devotion to Me, which is the steady flow of loving contemplation.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Having become Brahman, serene in the Self, he neither grieves nor desires; regarding all beings equally, he attains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He who has realized Brahman and attained clarity of mind, neither grieves nor desires; being equal to all beings by seeing the Self in them, he obtains the highest devotion to Me (mature meditation which leads to direct realization).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Established in Brahman, serene in mind, he neither grieves nor desires; being equal to all beings due to lack of ego, he attains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Becoming Brahman, with serene mind, he neither grieves nor desires; equal to all beings, he obtains supreme devotion to Me (the fourth and highest class of devotion, which is knowledge itself).

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
He who has realized the self as consisting of unlimited knowledge and subservient to Me, who is serene-minded, neither grieves nor desires anything else. Finding all other things to be as worthless as straw, he attains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Becoming Brahman, serene in the Self, he neither grieves nor desires; regarding all beings equally, he attains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Becoming Brahman, serene in the Self, he neither grieves nor desires; regarding all beings equally, he attains supreme devotion to Me.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything. He is equally disposed toward every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me.

 To the impersonalist, achieving the brahma-bhūta stage, becoming one with the Absolute, is the last word. But for the personalist, or pure devotee, one has to go still further, to become engaged in pure devotional service. This means that one who is engaged in pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord is already in a state of liberation, called brahma-bhūta, oneness with the Absolute. Without being one with the Supreme, the Absolute, one cannot render service unto Him. In the absolute conception, there is no difference between the served and the servitor; yet the distinction is there, in a higher spiritual sense. In the material concept of life, when one works for sense gratification, there is misery, but in the absolute world, when one is engaged in pure devotional service, there is no misery. The devotee in Kṛṣṇa consciousness has nothing for which to lament or desire. Since God is full, a living entity who is engaged in God’s service, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, becomes also full in himself. He is just like a river cleansed of all dirty water. Because a pure devotee has no thought other than Kṛṣṇa, he is naturally always joyful. He does not lament for any material loss or aspire for gain, because he is full in the service of the Lord. He has no desire for material enjoyment, because he knows that every living entity is a fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and therefore eternally a servant. He does not see, in the material world, someone as higher and someone as lower; higher and lower positions are ephemeral, and a devotee has nothing to do with ephemeral appearances or disappearances. For him stone and gold are of equal value. This is the brahma-bhūta stage, and this stage is attained very easily by the pure devotee. In that stage of existence, the idea of becoming one with the Supreme Brahman and annihilating one’s individuality becomes hellish, the idea of attaining the heavenly kingdom becomes phantasmagoria, and the senses are like serpents whose poison teeth are broken. As there is no fear of a serpent with broken teeth, there is no fear from the senses when they are automatically controlled. The world is miserable for the materially infected person, but for a devotee the entire world is as good as Vaikuṇṭha, or the spiritual sky. The highest personality in this material universe is no more significant than an ant for a devotee. Such a stage can be achieved by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, who preached pure devotional service in this age.