Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śauryaṃ tejo dhṛtirdākṣyaṃ yuddhe cāpyapalāyanam .
dānamīśvarabhāvaśca kṣātraṃ karma svabhāvajam

Word Meanings:
शौर्यम् - prowess
तेजः - splendor
धृतः - firmness
दाक्ष्यम् - dexterity
युद्धे - in battle
च - and
अपि - also
अपलायनम् - not fleeing
दानम् - charity
ईश्वरभावः - lordliness
च - and
क्षात्रम् - of Kshatriyas
कर्म - action
स्वभावजम् - born of nature.

Life Application:
Heroism, majesty, fortitude, dexterity, not fleeing in battle, generosity, lordliness—natural duties of a leader/warrior.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Heroism, majesty, fortitude, dexterity, not fleeing from battle, generosity and leadership — these are the duties of the Kshatriyas, born of their own nature.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Prowess, splendour, firmness, dexterity and also not fleeing from battle, generosity and lordliness are the duties of the Kshatriyas, born of (their own) nature.

शौर्यम् prowess? तेजः splendour? धृतः firmness? दाक्ष्यम् dexterity? युद्धे in battle? च and? अपि also? अपलायनम् not fleeing? दानम् generosity? ईश्वरभावः lordliness? च and? क्षात्रम् of Kshatriyas? कर्म action? स्वभावजम् born of nature.Commentary It is the first duty of Kshatriya (man of the warrior class or of royal blood) to be brave and chivalrous. Bravery is that sublime virtue through which one is naturally strong? vigorous and courageous. In the face of the most terrible calamity the mind will not be in the least perturbed. The Kshatriya is firm under any unfavourable or trying conditions or circumstances. He does not get the least depression of spirit even when he is in adverse circumstances. It is the skill by which the reason finds out its path amidst all untoward circumstances and eventually attains its goal. This is firmness? fortitude or courage.Dakshya Promptness He is able to decide rightly on the spot in matters that deman prompt attention doing without confusion? of duties which present themselves all of a sudden and demand prompt action.As the sunflower always turns its face towards the sun so does he always face his enemies. He will ever avoid turning his back to them on the field of battle. He is absolutely fearless. Just as a tree gives away its flowers and fruits freely to whoever desires them? as the jasmine sends out its sweet fragrace in every direction? so will a Kshatriya generously give to another whatever may be asked of him. His charity is boundless.Lordliness A Kshatriya king enjoys sovereignty over his subjects owing to the sure protection he grants them? exercises ruling power over his subjects who are to be ruled? and raises the rod of chastisement to punish the unrighteous or the wicked.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Valour, glory, firmness, skill, generosity, steadiness in battle and ability to rule - these constitute the duty of a soldier. They flow from his own nature.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In a Kshatriya, Rajas-guna is predominant. Varna is defined by mental temperament and actual behavior, not by hereditary birth. The duties of a Kshatriya include: valour (heroism), majesty (splendour), fortitude (steadfastness of purpose), dexterity (resourcefulness and promptness in action), not retreating from battle (facing life's challenges courageously), generosity (charity without greed), and lordliness (leadership and confidence to govern). These qualities empower a ruler to integrate spiritual values into governance.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Heroic deed, fiery energy, firmness, dexterity, and also non-feeling form battle, giving gifts, overlordship, are the duties of the Ksatriyas, born of their nature.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Valour, invincibility, steadiness, adroitness and non-fleeing in battle, generosity and lordliness are the duties of a Ksatriya born of his inherent nature.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The natural duties of the Ksatriyas are heroism, boldness, fortitude, capability, and also not retreating from battle, generosity and lordliness.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Heroism refers to the ability to fight even stronger opponents. Splendour is being unassailable by enemies. Firmness is the mental strength that keeps the body and senses active even in times of great calamity. Dexterity is prompt action without confusion.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Heroism, majesty, patience, capability to govern, never retreating from battle, generosity, and lordship — these are all the natural duties of a Kshatriya.

Commentary: Heroism (Shaurya) is the readiness to perform duty, with no fear of death or injury on the battlefield. Splendour (Tejas) is that power before which evildoers hesitate to cross boundaries. Fortitude (Dhrti) is maintaining righteousness even when persecuted by enemies. Dexterity (Dakshya) is the skill in governance. Generosity (Dana) is giving with boundlessness, and Lordliness (Ishvarabhava) is the natural tendency to govern and lead others righteously.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Valour' is the ability of plunging into a battle without fear. 'Invincibility' is the capacity to remain undefeated by others. 'Steadiness' is the capacity to complete a work that has been started despite obstacles. 'Adroitness' is the ability in executing all works. 'Apalayana' is not fleeing in a battle though one is convinced of one's death. 'Generosity' is parting with one's own possessions to others even to its entirety. 'Lordliness' is the capacity to govern all others. This is the duty of a Ksatriya born of his inherent nature.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Svabhavajam, the natural; ksatra-karma, [A variant reading is ksatram karma.-Tr.] enjoined duties of the Ksatriyas, of the Ksatriya caste; are sauryam, heroism; tejah, boldness; dhrtih, fortitude, as is seen in the case of one who is not depressed under all circumstances, being sustained by doggedness; daksyam, capability engagement without confusion in duties which suddenly present them-selves; api ca, and also; apalayanam, not retreating; yuddhe, from battle, not fleeing from enemies; danam, generosity, being free in the distribution of gifts; isvarabhavah, lordliness, manifesting (exercising) rulership over those who have to be ruled.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The natural duties of a Kshatriya are heroism, fortitude (patience without weakness), dexterity in battle, and lordliness (regal power).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Heroism, splendour (invincibility), fortitude, dexterity (focus under pressure), not retreating from battle, generosity (boundless giving), and lordliness (showing ruling power) — these are the natural duties of a Kshatriya, born of Rajas-guna with subordinate Sattva.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Heroism, splendour, fortitude, capability, not retreating from battle, generosity, and ruling power — these are the natural duties of a Kshatriya.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The natural duties of a Kshatriya are heroism, invincibility, fortitude, capability to handle sudden tasks without confusion, not retreating from enemies, generosity, and exercising lordliness over subjects.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Heroism is fearless entry into battle. Splendour is remaining unassailable. Fortitude is persistence under obstacles. Dexterity is efficiency. Lordliness is the capacity to govern and protect all subjects.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The natural duties of a Kshatriya are valour, majesty, patience, resourcefulness, courage (not fleeing) in battle, generosity, and lordliness (the nature to govern).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Valour, majesty, patience, dexterity (skill in battle/enthusiasm), generosity, and lordliness (capacity to govern wrongdoers) — these are the natural duties of a Kshatriya.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle, generosity and leadership are the natural qualities of work for the kṣatriyas.

There is no purport for this verse