Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
jñānaṃ jñeyaṃ parijñātā trividhā karmacodanā .
karaṇaṃ karma karteti trividhaḥ karmasaṃgrahaḥ

Word Meanings:
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
ज्ञेयम् - the knowable
परिज्ञाता - the knower
त्रिविधा - threefold
कर्मचोदना - impulse to action
करणम् - the organ
कर्म - the action
कर्ता - the agent
इति - thus
त्रिविधः - threefold
कर्मसंग्रहः - the basis of action.

Life Application:
Knowledge, knowable, knower are threefold incentive to action; instrument, action, agent are threefold constituent of action.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the threefold impulse to action; and the instrument, the action, and the doer are the threefold constituents of action.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Knowledge, the knowable and the knower form the threefold impulse to action; the organ, the action and the agent form the threefold basis of action.

ज्ञानम् knowledge? ज्ञेयम् the knowable? परिज्ञाता the knower? त्रिविधा threefold? कर्मचोदना impulse to action? करणम् the organ? कर्म the action? कर्ता the agent? इति thus? त्रिविधः threefold? कर्मसंग्रहः the basis of action.Commentary Knowledge? the knower and the thing to be known? are together the seed of this world. This is known as the Triputi or the traid. It is the conjunction of these three that impels a man to threefold action? viz.? mental? verbal and physical. This triad is the driving force of all the activities of man. He rejoices at the sight of palatable sweetmeats and delicious fruits but is terrified at the sight of a cobra or tiger. The sight of pleasant or unpleasant objects affects him and he attempts either to possess the agreeable objects or to avoid the disagreeable ones.The Antahkarana (the inner instrument) consists of the mind? intellect? subconscious mind and egoism. The ear? the skin? the tongue? the nose and the eye are the five organs of knowledge. The individual soul? propelled by these five senses? is led into activity. He does actions with the help of the five organs of action? viz.? speech? hands? feet? genitals and anus.Jnanam Any knowledge knowledge in general knowledge of worldly objects? etc.Jneyam The object to be known objects in general.Parijnata The knower? the experiencer or the enjoyer? putting on the nature of the limiting adjuncts? a creature of ignorance.This triad forms the threefold impulse to all action? to action in general. The performance of an action in order to get a thing or to avoid an object is possible only when there is the conjunction of the three? viz.? knowledge? knowable and knower.Karanam The organ That by which something is done. The actions done by the five causes of action? viz.? the body? etc.? which are grouped under the three classes according to their respective seats? viz.? mind? speech and body? are all due to the interplay of the organ? etc.Karta The agent or the doer he who sets the organs in motion or action and puts on the nature of the limiting adjunct or vehicle in which he acts. All actions inhere in these three (the organ? the doer and the action itself) and they are? therefore? said to form the basis or the threefold constituents of action.As action? the various factors of action and the fruits are all made up of the Gunas? the Lord describes them in the following verses.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Knowledge, the knower and the object of knowledge, these are the three incentives to action; and the act, the actor and the instrument are the threefold constituents.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
While describing the nature of action, Lord Krishna explains the five causes of action and the actionless Self. Expanding on that, he now states the three motivators of action and the three constituents of action. The motivator of every action is knowledge of the object. The triad of knower (parijnata), the knowable (jneyam), and knowledge (jnanam) is called the triputi in Vedanta. Action can be inspired in three ways: by desire in the knower, by the temptation of the object, or by the memory of past happiness. Once inspiration arises, the action requires the doer (karta), the instrument (karanam), and the action itself (karma), which form the threefold constituents (karma-sangraha). Action is impossible in the absence of any of these.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The instrument of knowledge,  the object-of-knowledge, and the knowing subject-the prompting-in-action, consisting of these three-fold elements is [itself] the proper grasping of action with three-fold elements viz., the instrument, the object and the agent.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Knowledge, object of knowledge and the knower are the threefold incitements to action. The instrument, the act and the agent are the threefold constituents of action.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Knowledge, the object the knowledge and the knower-this is the threefold inducement to action. The comprehension of actions comes under three heads-the instruments, the object and the subject.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The injunction to perform actions is based on the triad of knowledge, knowable and knower. The constituents of action are the instrument, action, and doer. Even though the Self is actionless, the scriptures command actions to earn God's grace, which generates desire for spiritual progress, leading to the ultimate goal. Therefore, the scriptural injunctions are not in vain.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The prompting of action is characterized by the conjunction of knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower. The physical, verbal, or mental activities are comprehended under the three constituents: the instrument, the object, and the agent.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower - these three are the prompting (incentives) to action; and the instrument, the action (work), and the doer (agent) - these three form the basis (constituents) of action.

Commentary: Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the three factors that motivate action. Before any action, there is knowledge of the object. For example, before drinking water, there is knowledge of thirst. The object to be known is jneyam and the knower is parijnata. In action, the instrument is karana (senses), the action is karma (various activities like eating, drinking, walking), and the doer is karta (one who identifies with the work). The main binding force is egoism (karta-bhava). If there is no egoism, there is no karma-sangraha.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
(i) 'Knowledge' means this knowledge about the acts which ought to be performed. (ii) The 'object of knowledge' is the act which ought to be performed. (iii) 'The knower' is the person who knows that act. The meaning is that the injunction to do acts, like Jyotistoma etc., is a combination of knowledge, object of knowledge, and the knower. Among these, action itself, which is the object of knowledge, is briefly described as threefold - these being the instrument, action and the agent. The instrument forms the materials etc., which are the means. The action consists of the sacrifice etc. The agent is the performer.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Jnanam etc.  Prompting-in-action :  the will to exert. At that time those things which - because they exist in one's thought alone - are referable by the terms knowledge, obect-of-knowledge and knowing-subject;  at the time of that will (to exert) taking the form  'I shall enjoy it; for it is caused by me'  as well as at the time of executing th act, the very same things-because they are fully absorbed  [in desire for fruits] - get the names instrument, object and agent.  Therefore, because there is no such absorption  [in desire for fruits] in the case of  the men of Yoga, there is  no  room in their action for the expressions instrument etc.; rather they exist only as knowledge etc.  This is the purport here.			
 Now  [the Lord]  speaks to explain, in brief, the classification of all these six items, basing on the classification of the Strands :-

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Jnanam, knowledge (-being derived in the sense of 'that through which something is known', jnana means knowledge concerning all things in general-): so also jneyam, the object of knowledge (-that also is a reference to all objects in general-); similarly, parijnata, the knower, the experiencer, a product of ignorance, who partakes of the nature of the limiting adjuncts;-thus, this tripartite group formed by these is the trividha, threefold; karma-codana, inducement ot action, inducer of all actions in general. For, it is when the three, viz knowledge etc., combine that commencement of all actions meant either for acceptance or rejection [Acceptance, rejection or indifference.] are possible. After that, what are initiated by the five, viz locus etc., and are grouped in three ways according to the differences of their being based on speech, mind and body become comprehended under the three, viz instrument etc. This is what is being stated: Karma-sangrahah, the comprehension [It is well know that actions are based on the three-instrument etc.] of actions; iti, comes under; trividhah, three heads, three classes; viz karanam, the instrument (-derived in the sense of that through which anything is done-), i.e. the external (organs) (ear etc.) and the internal (organs) (intellect etc.); karma, the object (-derivatively meaning that which is most cherished by the subject and is achieved through an act-); and karta, the subject (agent), who employs the instrument etc., who partakes of the nature of the limiting adjuncts.
Sangrahah is derived thus: that in which something is comprehended. The comprehension of action (karma) is karma-sangrahah. Indeed, action becomes included in these three. Hence is this 'threefold comprehension of action'.
Now then, since action, instrument and result are all constituted by the gunas, it becomes necessary to state the three fold variety in them based on the differences among the gunas, viz sattva, rajas and tamas. Hence it is begun:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
The scriptural injunctions are addressed to the individual soul who has a sense of agency (due to connection with the body, intellect, etc.). In action, the constituents are the instrument, the action itself, and the agent. The Supreme Lord is the ultimate prompter and controller of all actions.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Scriptural injunctions are threefold: knowledge, the knowable, and the knower. Similarly, the basis of action is threefold: the instrument, the action, and the agent.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Knowledge is the illumination of the object. The knowable is the object of knowledge. The knower is the experiencer who identifies with the intellect. This triad motivates all action. Once motivated, the action takes place through the instrument (senses), the action itself, and the doer (agent).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the threefold prompts to action. The instrument, the action, and the agent are the threefold constituents of action.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The motivation for all action is the triad of knowledge, the knowable, and the knower. The execution of action involves the instrument, the action itself, and the doer.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Knowledge, the knowable, and the knower stimulate action. The senses, the activity, and the agent carry out the action.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The threefold impulse of action is knowledge, the object, and the knower. The threefold basis of action is the instrument, the action, and the agent.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Action is motivated by the triad of knowledge, object, and knower. The constituents of action are the instrument, the action, and the doer.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the three factors that motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer are the three constituents of action.

 There are three kinds of impetus for daily work: knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itself and the worker are called the constituents of work. Any work done by any human being has these elements. Before one acts, there is some impetus, which is called inspiration. Any solution arrived at before work is actualized is a subtle form of work. Then work takes the form of action. First one has to undergo the psychological processes of thinking, feeling and willing, and that is called impetus. The inspiration to work is the same if it comes from the scripture or from the instruction of the spiritual master. When the inspiration is there and the worker is there, then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses, including the mind, which is the center of all the senses. The sum total of all the constituents of an activity is called the accumulation of work.