Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
akīrtiṃ cāpi bhūtāni kathayiṣyanti te.avyayām .
sambhāvitasya cākīrtirmaraṇādatiricyate

Word Meanings:
अकीर्तिम् - dishonour
च - and
अपि - also
भूतानि - beings
कथयिष्यन्ति - will tell
ते - thy
अव्ययाम् - everlasting
संभावितस्य - of the honoured
च - and
अकीर्तिः - dishonour
मरणात् - than death
अतिरिच्यते - exceeds.

Life Application:
Uphold your personal integrity diligently, knowing that losing your honor damages your life more than physical hardship.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
And all people will keep speaking of your lasting infamy; and for a man of honour, dishonour is worse than death.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
People, too, will recount thy everlasting dishonour; and to one who has been honoured, dishonour is worse than death.

अकीर्तिम् dishonour? च and? अपि also? भूतानि beings? कथयिष्यन्ति will tell? ते thy? अव्ययाम् everlasting? संभावितस्य of the honoured? च and? अकीर्तिः dishonour? मरणात् than death? अतिरिच्यते exceeds.Commentary The world also will ever recount thy infamy which will survive thee for a long time. Death is really preferable to disgrace to one who has been honoured as a great hero and mighty warrior with noble alities.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Men will talk forever of thy disgrace; and to the noble, dishonour is worse than death.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
For a well-known and honoured hero, dishonour is worse than death. Sri Krishna offers Arjuna one more argument to shake off his indecision and turn him toward the war. Even though Arjuna's cause is one of righteousness and justice, his fleeing from battle is a mark of cowardice. In the Lord's words lies an implicit sympathy for Arjuna, for He knows that even a valiant hero like Arjuna can, in a rush of emotion, become weak of mind and lose heart. To continue -

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The creatures will speak of  your endless ill-fame;  and for the one who has been highly esteemed the illfame is worse than death.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Further, people will speak ill of you for all time, and for one accustomed to be honoured, dishonour is worse than death.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
People also will speak of your unending infamy. And to an honoured person infamy is worse than death.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having shown that a Kshatriya's refusal to fight brings a result in the next world, the commentator now shows that it also brings, by the mark of censure from the wise, a long-lasting result in this world too - hence 'not merely.' Anticipating the doubt that, since one's own death in battle is uncertain, even dishonour should be endured for the sake of self-preservation, he explains with the word 'dharmatma' (virtuous). His purport, given through the word 'sambhavitasya' (of the honoured), is that dishonour among the respected is harder to bear than even death.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
And all beings, too, will speak of, that is, censure, your ever-abiding dishonour. That dishonour is more painful for a respected person than even death.

Explanation - 'akirtim capi bhutani kathayisyanti te.avyayam' - Even ordinary beings - men, gods, yakshas, rakshasas and the like - who have no relation with you, neither friendship nor enmity, will speak of your dishonour and infamy, saying: 'See, how cowardly Arjuna was, that he turned away from his Kshatriya duty. He was thought so heroic, but at the time of battle his cowardice was exposed, which no one had known before' - and so on.
The word 'te' conveys that your dishonour will spread even where your fame had reached - in heaven, in the world of mortals, and in the netherworld. 'Avyayam' conveys that the more famous a man becomes on account of excellence, the more enduring both his fame and his dishonour become.
'sambhavitasya cakirtirmaranadatiricyate' - In the first half of this verse the Lord spoke of Arjuna being censured by ordinary beings; now, in the second half, He states a general truth applicable to all.
When a person who is regarded as excellent in the eyes of the world, whom people view with high esteem, suffers dishonour, that dishonour is far more dreadful and painful for him than death itself. For in dying, one's life simply comes to an end, and no fault has been committed; but in incurring dishonour, one has personally fallen away from the bounds of dharma and from duty. The purport is that if a man regarded as excellent among people falls away from his duty, his infamy becomes exceedingly dreadful.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
You will then incur not merely the loss of all happiness and honour but will be the object of disrespect by all people, the alifies and even the unalified, for all time. They will ridicule you saying, 'When the battle began, Arjuna ran away.' It it be asked, 'What if it be so?", the reply is:  'To one who is honoured by all for courage, prowess, valour, etc., this kind of dishonour arising from the reverse of these attributes, is worse than death?  The meaning is that itself would be better for you than this kind of dishonour.

If it is said, 'How could dishonour accrue to me, who am a hero, but have withdrawn from the battle only out of love and compassion for my relatives?'  the reply is as follows:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 2.33–2.37 jointly): Atha ca etc., upto krta-niscavah.  Accepting what the opponent has stated, this pentad of verses is narrated as an argument : 'If your goodself prefers to abide by the generally accepted practice, even then this [fighting] must be undertaken necessarily'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Not only will there be the giving up of your duty and fame, but bhutani, people; ca api, also; kathayisyanti, will speak; te, of your; avyayam, unending, perpetual; akrtim, infamy. Ca, and; sambhavitasya, to an honoured person, to a person honoured with such epithets as 'virtuous', 'heroic', etc.; akirtih, infamy; atiricyate, is worse than; maranat, death. The meaning is that, to an honoured person death is perferable to infamy.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Further, the word 'akirtim' (infamy) is used. 'Bhutani' means all classes of beings. 'Sambhavitasya' refers to one regarded as victorious.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Thus, in giving up the battle, the loss of the desired fruits of fame and duty, and the attainment of the undesired fruit of sin, have been shown. Of these, the sin, being a distant fruit in the next world, is bearable through delay; but disgrace marked by censure from the wise is an immediate fruit and is utterly unbearable - hence it is said: beings such as gods, sages and men will, in their conversations, speak among themselves of your unending, long-lasting dishonour, saying 'this man is not virtuous, this man is no hero,' and the like. The particles 'ca' and 'api' serve to add together the loss of fame and duty. Thus, not only will you lose fame and duty and incur sin, you will also incur dishonour; and not only will you yourself incur it, but other beings too will proclaim it - such is the sense of the particles. It may be objected that since one's own death in battle is uncertain, dishonour too should be endured for the sake of self-preservation, which is of the highest importance; and indeed it is said in the Shanti Parva that one should strive to conquer enemies by conciliation, gifts, or dissension, together or separately, and should never fight, since victory and defeat in battle are both seen to be uncertain for combatants, and war should therefore be avoided - but only when the three prior means fail should one fight, so as to conquer the enemy through such resources; Manu too has said the same. Thus, to remove the doubt as to whether dishonour is truly painful for one who fears death, it is said that for a person held in high esteem for such unique qualities as virtue and heroism, dishonour exceeds even death, being harder to bear. 'Ca' here denotes reason: since dishonour is thus worse, death is indeed preferable, being the lesser evil. You too are held in the highest esteem, having consorted with Mahadeva and other gods; therefore the sense is that you will not be able to bear the suffering of dishonour. The quoted verse, being from a treatise on statecraft, is weaker than the injunction of dharmashastra not to withdraw from battle.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Further, the word 'akirtim' is used; 'avyayam' means everlasting. For one who is highly honoured, dishonour becomes far greater a burden than death.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Further, 'akirtim avyayam' means long-lasting infamy. For one who is honoured with such qualities as being virtuous and heroic, dishonour is worse than death; the meaning is that death is preferable to such dishonour.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Thus, the loss of visible and invisible fruits and the unseen sin have been stated; now the visible ill-effect is stated with 'akirtim'. Here 'akirti' means ill fame. It should be understood that even in 'na te kevalam' etc., only the unlimited sin belonging to the next world is meant. 'Fled when the battle had begun' conveys that, out of sheer panic, he did not even undertake the first engagement. The word 'avyaya' denotes imperishability, hence pervading all time; but how is pervading all places conveyed? In this way: if the dishonour did not pervade all places, it would not pervade all time either, since it would eventually contract and cease with the passage of time. Or else, 'avyayatva' here means simply not being diminished in place or time. 'Bhutani api' connects with 'api'; 'ca api' would otherwise be redundant, since 'bhutani' alone already gives a general reference - hence, by force of the word 'api', it is said that both the capable and incapable will speak of it. Anticipating the doubt that dishonour might be preferable, the latter half of the verse is given, hence 'tatah kim' (what then). The word 'ca' serves to remove this doubt. The reasons for Arjuna being held in high esteem are given by 'shaurya' etc. - 'sarva-sambhavitasya' means esteemed by all the beings, capable and incapable, previously mentioned. It may be asked whether death being worse than dishonour is stated as something to be rejected or accepted - not the former, since it is said 'living, one sees good things' (Mahabharata) and 'one should give up the earth for one's own sake,' nor the latter, since that would contradict the context; hence it is said 'evamvidhayah' (of such a kind). The saying 'living, one sees good things' is not, for a Kshatriya's son, something to be adopted here. Nor is this dishonour so slight that death would be preferable to it; rather, being of this all-pervading kind across time and place, it would lead even to hell, as established by the Smritis. Thus in the later Ramayana (Yuddha Kanda 7.45.12-13), Raghunatha's words state: 'Whoever's ill fame is sung among people falls into the lowest worlds for as long as that word is spoken of him.' Death in battle, on the other hand, leads to heaven - such is the purport.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Further, it is not only that sin will destroy the next world; even in this world there will be dishonour - hence 'akirtim ca api'. Beings too will speak of your ever-persisting, unending infamy. By referring to beings in the neuter gender, it is suggested that even those otherwise unfit to speak of it will do so. If it be asked what results from such talk of dishonour, it is answered by 'sambhavitasya' - for one esteemed in battle and the like, dishonour is greater, that is, exceeds even death.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Avyayam' means long-lasting.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
People will always speak of your infamy, and for a respectable person, dishonor is worse than death.

 Both as friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Kṛṣṇa now gives His final judgment regarding Arjuna’s refusal to fight. The Lord says, “Arjuna, if you leave the battlefield before the battle even begins, people will call you a coward. And if you think that people may call you bad names but that you will save your life by fleeing the battlefield, then My advice is that you’d do better to die in the battle. For a respectable man like you, ill fame is worse than death. So, you should not flee for fear of your life; better to die in the battle. That will save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and from losing your prestige in society.” So, the final judgment of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battle and not withdraw.