Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yattu pratyupakārārthaṃ phalamuddiśya vā punaḥ .
dīyate ca parikliṣṭaṃ taddānaṃ rājasaṃ smṛtam

Word Meanings:
यत् - which
तु - indeed
प्रत्युपकारार्थम् - with a view to
फलम् - fruit
उद्दिश्य - looking for
वा - or
पुनः - again
दीयते - is given
च - and
परिक्लिष्टम् - reluctantly
तत् - that
दानम् - charity
राजसम् - Rajasic
स्मृतम् - is held to be.

Life Application:
Give charity willingly and joyfully, avoiding giving reluctantly or expecting any personal return.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
And that gift which is given with a view to receive something in return, or looking for a reward, or reluctantly, is held to be Rajasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
And, that gift which is given with a view to receive something in return, or looking for a reward, or reluctantly, is held to be Rajasic.

यत् which? तु indeed? प्रत्युपकारार्थम् with a view to receive in return? फलम् fruit? उद्दिश्य looking for? वा or? पुनः again? दीयते is given? च and? परिक्लिष्टम् reluctantly? तत् that? दानम् gift? राजसम् Rajasic? स्मृतम् is held to be.Commentary Charity or gift that is given in the hope that it will be returned in the future and praised in public or that the gift will bring some unseen reward or heavenly pleasure is passionate. If a man makes a gift to a Brahmana or a Sannyasin with the hope that all his sins will be washed away? this is also a Rajasic gift. If a man is grieved at heart after making the gift this is also a gift of passionate nature.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
That which is given for the sake of the results it will produce, or with the hope of recompense,or grudgingly - that may truly be said to be the outcome of Passion.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
A gift given grudgingly (pariklishtam) or reluctantly, such as paying a donation under pressure, or given with the expectation of receiving some benefit in return (pratyupakarartham) or a future reward, is Rajasic.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
But, what is given to get a return of favour or again with a view to a fruit, and which is very much vexed - that gift is held to be of the Rajas.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
But that which is given as a consideration for something receievd or in expectation of future reward, or grudgingly, is called Rajasika gift.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
But the gift which is given expecting reciprocation, or again, with a desire for its result, and which is given grudgingly,- that is considered to be born of rajas.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri notes that the definition of Rajasic and Tamasic charity is clear. Rajasic charity is characterized by regret or reluctance at having spent so much wealth, and is given for visible returns or unseen heavenly rewards.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
And, that gift which is given with a view to receive something in return, or looking for a reward, or reluctantly, is held to be Rajasic.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'pratyupakarartham' refers to giving with the expectation of some earthly return (like business favors, family help, or medicine). 'Phalam uddishya' refers to seeking unseen rewards in the next world, like heaven. 'Parikliṣṭam' means giving grudgingly or with regret, feeling pain at parting with wealth, or giving very little after much calculation. This self-centered approach characterizes Rajasic charity.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
That gift which is given grudgingly, viz., gift of useless things with a sly expectation of something in return that is said to be gift of Rajasa nature.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.20–17.22 jointly): Datavyam etc. upto udahrtam.  With the thought that  'One must give' :  thinking that the [scriptural] injunction  'One must give' is to be obeyed in order to avoid sin.  Very much vexed : because of the fault of [giving] very little. A gift is converted into a bad one by offending its recipient, and so on.  Thus the activities of the worldly men are explained on the basis of their three-fold intentions born of the Sattva and so on.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tu, but; the danam, gift; yat, which; diyate, is made; prati-upakara-artham, expecting reciprocation-with this purpose in view: 'In time, he will render service in return'-; va punah, or again; uddisya, with a desire for; its phalam, result-that, 'To me will accrue some unseen reward of this gift'-; and which is diyate, given; pariklistam, grudgingly, with reluctance; tat, that; is smrtam, considered to be; rajasam, born of rajas.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that a gift given for visible earthly return ('he will help me later') or unseen heavenly rewards (heaven), which is given reluctantly with regret ('how could I spend so much money!'), is declared as Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that a gift which is given expecting that the recipient will help the donor in future, or with a desire for heaven, and which is given with mental reluctance, is declared as Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that a gift given for a visible return in this world ('he will benefit me later') or for an unseen reward in the next world (heaven), and which is given with distress and regret ('how could I part with this wealth'), is Rajasic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that a gift is Rajasic when it is given with a sly expectation of return. Because the donor parts with the wealth reluctantly, he often gives away useless or inferior things (akalyana-dravyakam) while keeping the good ones for himself.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that a gift is Rajasic when it is given to gain future favors from powerful persons, or for the sake of the four fruits of life (dharma, artha, kama, moksha) but with a heavy, reluctant heart, doubting whether the reward will come.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'pariklishtam' is an adverb of manner meaning given with mental agitation and anxiety about spending so much money.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a desire for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood is said to be charity in the mode of passion.

 Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom and sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards: “Why have I spent so much in this way?” Charity is also sometimes given under some obligation, at the request of a superior. These kinds of charity are said to be given in the mode of passion. There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts to institutions where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are not recommended in the Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode of goodness is recommended.