Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
sañjaya uvāca .
etacchrutvā vacanaṃ keśavasya kṛtāñjalirvepamānaḥ kirīṭī .
namaskṛtvā bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṃ sagadgadaṃ bhītabhītaḥ praṇamya

Word Meanings:
एतत् - that
श्रुत्वा - having heard
वचनम् - speech
केशवस्य - of Kesava
कृताञ्जलिः - with joined palms
वेपमानः - trembling
किरीटि - Arjuna
नमस्कृत्वा - prostrating
भूयः - again
एव - even
आह - addressed
कृष्णम् - to Krishna
सगद्गदम् - in a choked voice
भीतभीतः - overwhelmed with fear
प्रणम्य - having prostrated.

Life Application:
Hearing these words of time, bow down with trembling hands and offer your humble, loving praise.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Sanjaya said—Hearing this speech of Lord Kesava, Kiriti (Arjuna), with folded hands and trembling, offered obeisances and, being overwhelmed with fear, spoke again to Lord Krishna in a faltering voice.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Sanjaya said  Having heard that speech of Lord Krishna, Arjuna, with joined palms, trembling, prostrating himself, again addressed Krishna, in a choked voice, bowing down, overwhelmed with fear.

एतत् that? श्रुत्वा having heard? वचनम् speech? केशवस्य of Kesava? कृताञ्जलिः with joined palms? वेपमानः trembling? किरीटि Arjuna? नमस्कृत्वा prostrating (himself)? भूयः again? एव even? आह addressed? कृष्णम् to Krishna? सगद्गदम् in a choked voice? भीतभीतः overwhelmed with fear? प्रणम्य having prostrated.Commentary When anyone is in a state of extreme terror or joy he sheds tears on account of pain or exhilaration of spirits. Then his throat is choked and he stammers or speaks indistinctly or in a dull? choked voice. Arjuna was extremely frightened when he saw the Cosmic Form and so he spoke in a stammering tone.There is great significane in Sanjayas words. He thought that Dhritarashtra might come to terms or make peace with the Pandavas when he knew that his sons would certainly be killed for want of proper support when Drona and Karna would be killed by Arjuna. He hoped that conseently there would be peace and happiness to both the parties. But Dhritarashtra was obstinate he did not listen to this suggestion on account of the force of destiny.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Sanjaya continued: "Having heard these words from the Lord Shri Krishna, the Prince Arjuna, with folded hands trembling, prostrated himself and with choking voice, bowing down again and again, and overwhelmed with awe, once more addressed the Lord.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
With the natural ease of a master dramatist, Vyasa shifts the scene from the battlefield to the quiet chambers of the palace where Sanjaya is narrating the events to the blind King, Dhritarashtra. Three times in this chapter, Vyasa takes the reader away from the terrifying atmosphere of Kurukshetra, not only to quicken the pace of the narrative but also to give a much-needed relief to the reader's mind, which would otherwise get exhausted by the continuous tension of the 'terrible beauty.' It must never be forgotten that Sanjaya is our special correspondent in the Gita, who has complete sympathy for the righteous cause of the Pandavas. Naturally, as soon as he reports the destruction of Bhishma, Drona and others through the words of the Lord, he wants to make the blind, old man aware of the imminent, terrible catastrophe. As we have seen earlier, only Dhritarashtra could have stopped the war even at this stage, and Sanjaya is extremely anxious to see that the war is somehow stopped. Thus, Sanjaya's intention becomes clear from the very language used in this verse. Suddenly, Sanjaya addresses Arjuna here as 'Kiriti' (the crowned one). Perhaps, this is a bold prophecy by which Sanjaya expects Dhritarashtra to see the futility of this destructive war. But a blind man can never see, and if his intellect too is shrouded in delusion, there is no question of seeing. If the good sense of King Dhritarashtra cannot be awakened due to his extreme attachment to his sons, Sanjaya wants to try a psychological treatment. If it is described in detail how everyone is trembling with fear upon seeing the vision, it naturally strikes terror even in the hearts of brave men. If Arjuna, a close friend of Krishna, also trembles with fear and speaks to the Lord in a faltering voice, then Sanjaya expects that any wise man would be able to recognize the horror of the impending war and the terrible consequences that would befall the defeated side. But even these words of Sanjaya had no effect on Dhritarashtra's mind, who had become completely blind to everything else except his foolish love for his sons. Addressing the Lord of the Cosmic Form, Arjuna speaks:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Sanjaya said  On hearing this  speach of Kesava, the crowned-prince (Arjuna) had his palms folded; and trembling he protstrated himself to Krsna; and stammering, and being very much afraid and bowing down, he spoke to Him again.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Sanjaya said  Having heard this speech of Krsna, Arjuna did Him obeisance; and trembling with awe, he bowed down again, and with folded palms, and trembling, he spoke to Krsna in a choked voice.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Sanjaya said  Hearing this utterance of Kesava, Kiriti (Arjuna), with joined palms and trembling, protrating himself, said again to Krsna with a faltering voice, bowing down overcome by fits of fear:

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sanjaya said: Sanjaya related this incident to the King (Dhritarashtra) thinking that the King would make peace out of fear of defeat. The 'aforesaid utterance' refers to 'I am Time (Kala)...' etc. Raising the question as to why Sanjaya informed the King of the conversation between Arjuna and the Lord during the vision of the Cosmic Form, the significance of his speech is explained here. That same intention is clarified through a question beginning with 'how' etc. To the query: 'Then why did the King not make peace even after hearing Sanjaya's words?', the answer is given: 'Even that...'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Sanjaya said—Hearing these words of Lord Kesava, Kiriti (Arjuna), trembling with fear, folded his hands, bowed down, and bowing down again, spoke to Lord Krishna in a choked voice, overwhelmed with fear.

Commentary—'etacchrutvā vacanaṃ keśavasya kṛtāñjalirvepamānaḥ kirīṭī'—Arjuna was already terrified, and then the Lord, by saying 'I am Time (Kala), I will devour everyone,' frightened the one who was already scared even more. The gist is that from 'kālo'smi' up to 'mayā hatāṁstvaṁ jahi', the Lord spoke only of destruction. Hearing this, Arjuna began to tremble with fear and started bowing down repeatedly with folded hands.

When Arjuna had killed the demons like Kala, Khanja, etc., to help Indra, Indra, being pleased, gave Arjuna a divine 'kirita' (crown) shining like the sun. Because of this, Arjuna came to be called Kiriti (Footnote p. 598). The significance of using 'Kiriti' here is that even Arjuna, who had helped Indra by slaying great demons, is trembling upon seeing the Lord's Cosmic Form. 'namaskṛtvā bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṃ sagadgadaṃ bhītabhītaḥ praṇamya'—Time devours all and spares no one, because it is the Lord's destructive power which constantly destroys. Here, when Arjuna saw the extremely fierce Cosmic Form of the Lord, he felt that the Lord is the Time of even Time—Mahakala. There is no one else besides Him to save from Time. Therefore, Arjuna, overwhelmed with fear, bows down to the Lord again and again. The word 'bhūyaḥ' (again) implies that Arjuna had previously offered prayers and obeisances from the fifteenth to the thirty-first verses, and now he offers prayers and obeisances once again. The voice can choke out of joy as well as fear. Here, the context is fear. If Arjuna had been extremely terrified, he would not have been able to speak at all. But Arjuna speaks in a choked voice, which proves that he is not that terrified.

Connection—Now, from the next verse, Arjuna begins his prayers to the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Sanjaya said  Having heard the speech of Krsna, ocean of affection for the seekers of refuge in Him, Arjuna did obeisance to Him. Trembling with fear, he bowed again and again before Him. With folded palms, and trembling, Arjuna spoke in a choked voice with emotion.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Srutva, hearing; etat, this, aforesaid; vacanam, utterance; kesavasya, of Kesava; Kiriti, krtanjalih, with joined palms; and vepamanah, trembling; nama-skrtva, prostrating himself; aha, said; bhuyah eva, again; krsnam, to Krsna; sa-gadgadam, with a faltering voice-.
A person's throat becomes choked with phlegm and his eyes full of tears when, on being struck with fear, he is overcome by sorrow, and when, on being overwhelmed with affection, he is filled with joy. The indistinctness and feleness of sound in speech that follows as a result is what is called faltering (gadgada). A speech that is accompanied with (saha) this is sa-gadgadam. It is used adverbially to the act of utterance.
Pranamya, bowing down with humility; bhita-bhitah, overcome by fits of fear, with his mind struck again and again with fear-this is to be connected with the remote word aha (said).
At this juncture the words of Sanjaya have a purpose in view. How? It is thus: Thinking that the helpless Duryodhana will be as good as dead when the four unconerable ones, viz Drona and others, are killed, Dhrtarastra, losing hope of victory, would conclude a treaty. From that will follow peace on either side. Under the influence of fate, Dhrtarastra did not even listen to that!

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sanjaya said to the depressed Dhritarashtra what happened after that—'etat' (hearing this) etc. Hearing this, Arjuna spoke.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Having understood that with the death of Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, and Karna, on whom all hopes of victory rested, the supportless Duryodhana is as good as dead, and if Dhritarashtra abandons the hope of victory and makes peace, then there will be peace for both sides; with this intention, on being asked what happened next, Sanjaya said—'etat' etc. Hearing these aforesaid words of Kesava, the crowned (Kiriti, famous as a great hero wearing the crown gifted by Indra) Arjuna, who was trembling with confusion caused by the sight of the most wonderful form, having offered obeisances to Krishna, the Lord who destroys the sins of His devotees, spoke again. 'Sagadgadam' means speaking with a faltering voice, which is the modification of speech characterized by slowness, trembling, etc., due to the throat being choked with phlegm when the eyes are filled with tears from fear and joy. 'Bhitabhithah' means being extremely terrified; having first bowed and then prostrated again, becoming very humble, he spoke—such is the connection.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sanjaya said to Dhritarashtra what happened after that—'etat' etc. Hearing these words of Kesava in the form of the preceding three verses, the trembling Kiriti (Arjuna), with folded hands, offered obeisances to Krishna and spoke again. How did he speak? He spoke in a faltering voice (sagadgadam) caused by the trembling of the throat due to the influence of fear, joy, etc. Furthermore, he spoke being extremely terrified and bowing down low.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The fall of Bhishma has already been mentioned, and the fall of Drona and others, who have been slain by the Lord, is also inevitable—hearing this, and considering that with the death of the four unconquerable warriors (Drona, Bhishma, Karna, and Jayadratha) on whom the hope of victory depended, Duryodhana is as good as dead, Dhritarashtra, losing hope of victory, would make peace, which would bring about peace on both sides; with this hope, Sanjaya said—'etat' etc. Hearing these aforesaid words of Kesava, the trembling Kiriti (Arjuna), with folded hands, offered obeisances, and spoke to Krishna in a choked (slow) voice (sagadgadam) caused by the choking of the throat due to phlegm when the eyes were filled with tears from the stroke of sorrow due to fear and from the rise of joy due to affection. He spoke being extremely terrified and bowing down again and again—this is the connection. As for the view of some who say that if 'aha' (spoke) is taken as a verb here, it would be redundant with 'Arjuna uvacha' (Arjuna said), and therefore the connection should be 'pranamya Arjuna uvacha' (having bowed, Arjuna said) and not 'pranamya aha', and that 'aha' here is not a verb but an indeclinable particle used for emphasis—that is erroneous. Because a similar style is observed in passages like 'tatah sa vismayavisto...', and therefore raising the objection of redundancy and resolving it is of no consequence.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In the verse 'etacchrutva', the commentator shows the reason for the twofold salutation and the proper syntax (anvaya) of the scattered words—'etadasrita' etc. The first salutation was offered helplessly upon hearing the words of the Lord, and the subsequent prostration and folding of hands were for beginning the speech that follows by the terrified Arjuna. Just as He revealed His cosmic body merely upon request, He also revealed His intention solely out of affection—with this in mind, he says 'asritavatsalyajaladheh' (ocean of affection for the seekers of refuge). He is 'Kesava' because He protects Brahma and Siva, and He is 'Krishna' because He destroys the worldly bondage of those who take refuge in Him. The crown-adorned head became blessed by bowing at the lotus feet of the Lord—with this significance the word 'Kiriti' is used here. As the great sage said: 'Even the head adorned with a crown is merely a burden if it does not bow down to Mukunda.'

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
In response to the query of what Arjuna did next, Sanjaya says to Dhritarashtra—'etat' etc. Hearing these aforesaid words of Kesava (who grants liberation even to Brahma and Siva), the crowned Arjuna began to tremble—for he had been commanded by the Lord to engage in the enjoyment of the kingdom, which he deemed inappropriate, and owing to his desire for liberation, he trembled. Then, to make a representation, with folded hands, and being extremely terrified (bhitabhitah) out of fear that the Lord might become displeased if he petitioned again after receiving the Lord's command, and prostrating (pranamya) by bowing deeply in his mind, he offered obeisances again to Krishna, who is personified eternal bliss, in a voice choked with love (sagadgadam), and being very humble, spoke, meaning he submitted his prayer.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sanjaya said in response to the query of what happened after the Lord had spoken thus. Here, by the sign of folded hands etc., it is indicated that Kiriti (Arjuna) will not violate the Lord's command. 'Sagadgadam' means he spoke in a faltering voice caused by the trembling of the throat due to the influence of fear, joy, etc. He spoke being extremely terrified—such is the connection. If 'aha' (spoke) is taken as a verb here, it would lead to redundancy when followed by 'Arjuna uvacha' (Arjuna said). Therefore, the connection should be 'pranamya Arjuna uvacha' and not 'pranamya aha'. Then what is the status of the verb 'aha'? The answer is that it is not a verb, but an indeclinable particle 'aha' used for emphasis/assertion, so there is no defect.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Sañjaya said to Dhṛtarāṣṭra: O King, after hearing these words from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the trembling Arjuna offered obeisances with folded hands again and again. He fearfully spoke to Lord Kṛṣṇa in a faltering voice, as follows.

 As we have already explained, because of the situation created by the universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna became bewildered in wonder; thus he began to offer his respectful obeisances to Kṛṣṇa again and again, and with faltering voice he began to pray, not as a friend, but as a devotee in wonder.