Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sarvakarmāṇyapi sadā kurvāṇo madvyapāśrayaḥ .
matprasādādavāpnoti śāśvataṃ padamavyayam

Word Meanings:
सर्वकर्माणि - all actions
अपि - also
सदा - always
कुर्वाणः - doing
मद्व्यपाश्रयः - taking refuge in Me
मत्प्रसादात् - by My grace
अवाप्नोति - obtains
शाश्वतम् - the eternal
पदम् - state or abode
अव्ययम् - indestructible.

Life Application:
Doing all actions continuously taking refuge in God, by divine grace he attains the eternal imperishable abode.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Though constantly performing all actions, one who has taken refuge in Me attains, by My grace, the eternal and indestructible state.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Doing all actions always having taken refuge in Me, by My grace he obtains the eternal indestructible state of being.

सर्वकर्माणि all actions? अपि also? सदा always? कुर्वाणः doing? मद्व्यपाश्रयः taking refuge in Me? मत्प्रसादात् by My grace? अवाप्नोति obtains? शाश्वतम् the eternal? पदम् state or abode? अव्ययम् indestructible.Commentary Worshipping Me with the flowers of his good actions he reaches the imperishable Brahmic seat of ineffable splendour through My grace. He attains union with Me and enjoys the supreme bliss. If by chance he commits some prohibited actions? still? as in the Ganga (Indias most holy river) the waters of the drains and roads find union? so My devotee? becoming united with Me? is unaffected by these prohibited actions.Worship of the Lord through ones duties purifies the heart of the aspirant and prepares him for the devotion to knowledge which eventually leads him to the attainment of Selfrealisation. The Yoga of Devotion is eulogised here.All actions Good actions and even the prohibited actions. He who takes shelter in Me? Vaasudeva? the Lord? with his whole self centred in Me attains the eternal abode of Vishnu? by the grace of the Lord.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Relying on Me in all his action and doing them for My sake, he attains, by My Grace, Eternal and Unchangeable Life.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Though constantly performing all actions, one who has taken refuge in Me attains, by My grace, the eternal and indestructible state. Commentary: True devotion is not mere quietism but acting in the world with surrender, free from the sense of agency and ownership. The Lord emphasizes that a realized seeker should return to the world to perform actions, but with the peace and joy born of Self-realization. By dedicating all actions to the Lord and taking sole refuge in Him, the seeker purifies his intellect and reaches the eternal (Sasvatam) and immutable (Avyayam) state of Brahman.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Performing all [his] actions all the time and taking refuge in Me, he attains, through My Grace, the eternal, changeless state.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Taking refuge in Me and performing all works constantly, one, by My grace, attains the eternal and immutable realm.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Ever engaging even in all actions, one to whom I am the refuge, attains the eternal, immutable State through My grace.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
He now concludes the section on the internal means of realization with this verse.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Performing even all actions (including occasional and desire-driven ones, or even if faults happen due to negligence) but with complete surrender to Me, he obtains by My grace the eternal and immutable state of Vishnu.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Though constantly performing all actions, one who has taken refuge in Me attains, by My grace, the eternal and indestructible state.

Commentary: A devotee who has taken sole refuge in the Lord does not rely on actions, their fruits, or worldly objects. Even while performing all kinds of duties (worldly, physical, or scriptural) in his daily life, he remains untouched because his mind is fully anchored in the Lord. Spiritual realization is not achieved by personal effort alone, but by the descent of divine grace (Prasada). The eternal abode (paramam padam) is attained by such a surrendered soul.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Taking refuge in Me' means leaving agency etc., to Me. He who performs 'all works constantly' means works that are not only obligatory and occasional acts but even those meant to fulfil desires (Kamya Karmas) - he attains, by My grace, the eternal realm which is immutable. 'Pada' means that which is attained. The meaning is that he attains Me. [The idea is that the performance of even those ritualistic actions enjoined for those having the fulfilment of certain desires in view, even these actions, if done without any such desire but only as the worship of the Supreme Person - the have the same effect as the performance of the enjoined daily and occasional rituals to which no effect except the purification of the self is offered by the Sastras.]

Since it is so, therefore:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sada, ever; kurvanah api, engaging even in; sarva-karmani, all actions, even the prohibited ones; madvyapasrayah, one to whom I am the refuge, to whom I, Vasudeva the Lord, am the refuge, i.e. one who has totally surrendered himself to Me; even he, apnoti, attains; the sasvatam, eternal; avyayam, immutable; padam, State of Visnu; mat-prasadat, through My, i.e. God's, grace.
Since this is so, therefore,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
He re-establishes the connection between devotional service and action here.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Doing all actions always under My direction and taking refuge in Me, he obtains by My grace the eternal and indestructible abode.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Though performing all actions always, the devotee who has taken sole refuge in Me (the Lord Vasudeva) and surrendered all agency, obtains by My grace the eternal and indestructible state of Vishnu.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Performing all actions always, whether obligatory, occasional, or desire-driven, one who has taken refuge in Me obtains by My grace the eternal and indestructible state.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Performing all actions always with total surrender to Me, one who has taken refuge in Me (Vasudeva) obtains by My grace the eternal and indestructible realm.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Performing even all kinds of actions, including those with desires, with total surrender of agency to Me, he attains by My grace the eternal and immutable state, which is Myself.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Constantly performing all actions, one who has taken refuge in Me obtains by My grace the eternal and indestructible realm.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Performing all actions always, the devotee who has taken refuge in Me (the inner Self) obtains by My grace the eternal and indestructible realm.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My pure devotee, under My protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.

 The word mad-vyapāśrayaḥ means under the protection of the Supreme Lord. To be free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts under the direction of the Supreme Lord or His representative, the spiritual master. There is no time limitation for a pure devotee. He is always, twenty-four hours a day, one hundred percent engaged in activities under the direction of the Supreme Lord. To a devotee who is thus engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness the Lord is very, very kind. In spite of all difficulties, he is eventually placed in the transcendental abode, or Kṛṣṇaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is no doubt about it. In that supreme abode, there is no change; everything is eternal, imperishable and full of knowledge.