Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
puruṣaḥ prakṛtistho hi bhuṅkte prakṛtijānguṇān .
kāraṇaṃ guṇasaṅgo.asya sadasadyonijanmasu

Word Meanings:
पुरुषः - Purusha
प्रकृतिस्थः - seated in Prakriti
हि - indeed
भुङक्ते - enjoys
प्रकृतिजान् - born of Prakriti
गुणान् - the qualities
कारणम् - the cause
गुणसङ्गः - attachment to the Gunas
अस्य - of his
सदसद्योनिजन्मसु - of birth in good

Life Application:
Recognize how the spirit seated in nature experiences qualities born of nature, causing birth in good or evil wombs.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Seated in Prakriti, the Purusha (individual soul) experiences the qualities born of Prakriti. Attachment to these qualities is the cause of this Purusha's birth in good and evil wombs.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The soul seated in Nature experiences the alities born of Nature; attachment to the alities is the cause of its birth in good and evil wombs.

पुरुषः Purusha? प्रकृतिस्थः seated in Prakriti? हि indeed? भुङक्ते enjoys? प्रकृतिजान् born of Prakriti? गुणान् alities? कारणम् the cause? गुणसङ्गः attachment to the Gunas? अस्य of his? सदसद्योनिजन्मसु of birth in good and evil wombs.Commentary The soul residing in Nature and identifying itself with the body and the senses which are modifications of Nature acts through the alities of Nature and experiences pleasure and pain and delusion. It thinks? I am happy? I am miserable? I am deluded? I am wise. When it thus identifies itself with the alities? it assumes individuality and takes birth in pure and impure wombs.The soul (Jivatma) enjoys the sensual objects in conjunction with the body? mind and the senses and thus becomes the enjoyer. Brahman is the silent witness and nonenjoyer. The souls attachment to the alities of pleasure? pain and delusion is the chief cause of its birth. If you add the word Samsara to the second half of the verse? it will mean Attachment to the alities is the cause of Samsara through births in good and evil wombs.Good wombs (Sat Yoni) are those of the gods and the like evil wombs (Asat Yoni) are those of lower animals. The human womb is partly good and partly evil on account of mixed Karmas.Purushah prakritisthah Purusha (the soul) seated in Prakriti (Nature). This is Avidya (ignorance). Attachment to the alities of Nature is Kama (desire). Avidya and Kama are the cause of Samsara.Jnana (wisdom) and Vairagya (dispassion) will destroy ignorance and desire. (Cf.XIV.5XV.7)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
God dwelling in the heart of Nature experiences the Qualities which nature brings forth; and His affinity towards the Qualities is the reason for His living in a good or evil body.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Although the Supreme Purusha, the Lord, has no worldly existence (Samsara), yet, appearing as if inseparable from the limiting adjuncts (Upadhis) born of Nature, He assumes the nature of an experiencer (Bhokta). This is the Purusha seated in Prakriti.

Cold and heat, attachment and aversion, pleasure and pain, etc., are the attributes of the insentient Nature (Kshetra). But because of identification with the Upadhis through the ego-sense (Aham-bhava), this Purusha considers them as his own attributes and needlessly suffers misery. From this, it is clear that the misery of the Purusha is not due to Nature, but due to his identification with it.

Because of excessive attachment to the qualities of Nature, this Purusha keeps taking birth in countless good and bad, superior and inferior wombs. These countless births are obtained by him according to the desires (Vasanas) which he keeps acquiring while performing actions and experiencing fruits in the world.

In this way, although from the absolute standpoint He is of the nature of Existence-Consciousness-Bliss (Saccidananda), due to ignorance (Avidya), this Purusha becomes a doer, an enjoyer, happy, miserable, and a transmigrating entity going from this world to the other.

Self-ignorance and attachment to qualities born of Nature are the cause of the Purusha's worldly misery. Therefore, the path of knowledge for the absolute cessation of the world (Samsara) has two parts: discrimination (Viveka) and dispassion (Vairagya). A seeker should attain Self-knowledge through discrimination and renounce false attachment through dispassion.

Directly pointing to the Supreme Self in the next verse, Lord Krishna says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
For, the Soul, seated on the Material Cause, enjoys the Strands born of the Material Cause;  His attachment to the Strands is the cause for his births in the good and evil wombs.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
(a) Indeed, the self seated in Prakrti experiences the Gunas born of Prakrti৷৷.

(b) ৷৷. Its attachment to these Gunas is the cause of birth in good and evil wombs.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Since the soul is seated in Nature, therefore it experiences the alities born of Nature. Contact with the alities is the cause of its births in good and evil wombs.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
In order to directly indicate the knowledge which is the cause of liberation under discussion, he introduces the next verse saying 'tasya' (of that). He explains the word 'upadraṣṭā' (spectator/witness) as meaning 'situated nearby', in the sense of being a witness to the active causes and effects merely by proximity. Anticipating the objection that like an ordinary observer, this observer might also be active, thereby contradicting the actionless nature (of the Self), he says 'svayam' (by itself/himself). Being a witness is nothing but mere proximity, without any activity of one's own. He clarifies this with an example, saying 'yathā' (just as). Or, he gives another meaning for 'upadraṣṭā' saying 'athavā' (or). If there are many observers, who is the 'upadraṣṭā'? To this he says 'teṣām' (of them). Since the prefix 'upa' means proximity and refers to the inner self, and since proximity ends there, 'upadraṣṭā' means the inner self which is both nearby and the observer—that is, the inner self which is the witness of all. He clarifies what was said by 'yataḥ' (since). Just as the supervisor (upadraṣṭā), being well-versed in the entire sacrifice, perceives the merits or defects of the sacrificer (yajamāna) and the priests (ṛtvij) in the sacrificial ritual, so this Self, of the nature of pure consciousness, perceives everything. Thus, he states another view with 'yajña'. He explains 'anumantā' (permitter/approver) with 'anumantā'. The approval (anumananam) is the satisfaction of a bystander when others are performing activities. That approval means that He who becomes the agent merely by proximity is the permitter (anumantā). Or, he gives another explanation saying 'athavā' (or), and clarifies the same with 'kārya' (effect). He gives another meaning saying 'athavā' (or) etc. Taking the word 'bhartā' (supporter), he asks 'what is supporting (bharaṇam)?' with 'bhartā'. Defining its nature, he establishes the Self's role as the supporter with 'deha' (body) etc. When 'bhoktā' (enjoyer) is mentioned, which implies activity, he distinguishes it according to the maxim 'experience ends in consciousness' (bhogaścidavasānatā) with 'agni' (fire) etc. Taking another attribute, he explains it as 'maheśvara' (the great Lord). He establishes the state of being the Supreme Self (Paramātman) with 'dehādīnām' (of the body etc.), referring to those superimposed by ignorance (avidyā). Supremacy (paramatvam) means being the most excellent. That refers to the one possessing the aforementioned attributes. He cites the Upanishadic text in favor of the word 'Paramātman' referring to the immanent Self with 'antaḥ' (within). He refutes the idea of its being aloof by asking a question 'kva' (where?). He shows from what it is superior with 'avyaktāt' (than the unmanifest). In the same context, he shows the compatibility of the remainder of the sentence with 'uttama' (supreme). The connection is that 'He is the supreme Person in this body'. He praises the previously mentioned knowledge of identity between the two clarified terms (Tat and Tvam) by stating its fruit with 'kṣetrajñaṁ cāpi' (and know Me as the Knower of the field).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Only the Purusha seated in Prakriti becomes the enjoyer of the qualities born of Prakriti, and association with the qualities is the cause of his birth in good and evil wombs.

Commentary:
Purushah prakritistho hi bhunkte prakritijan gunan — In reality, the Purusha is not situated in Prakriti (body) at all. But when he identifies himself with Prakriti (body) and considers the body as 'I' and 'mine', then he is said to be seated in Prakriti. Such a person seated in Prakriti (by assuming the favorable or unfavorable circumstances created by the qualities as giving pleasure or pain) becomes happy when favorable circumstances arise and unhappy when unfavorable circumstances arise. This indeed is the Purusha's becoming the enjoyer of the qualities born of Prakriti.

Just as in a motor accident, both the motor car and the driver have a hand. In the performance of the action, only the motor car has prominence, but the fruit of the accident (punishment) has to be borne only by the driver (doer) who associates himself with the motor car. In the same way, in the performance of worldly actions, both Prakriti and Purusha have a hand. In the performance of actions, only the body has prominence, but the fruit in the form of pleasure and pain has to be experienced only by the Purusha (doer) who associates himself with the body. If he does not associate himself with the body and considers all actions as being performed only by Prakriti (Gita 13.29), then he will not become the enjoyer of the fruits of those actions.

Karanam gunasango'sya sadasadyonijanmasu — Those wombs in which there is abundance of pleasure are called Sat Yoni (good wombs), and those wombs in which there is abundance of pain are called Asat Yoni (evil wombs). The cause of the Purusha's birth in good and evil wombs is only his association with the Gunas (qualities).

Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas — these three qualities are born of Prakriti. From these three qualities, all objects and actions are born. When the Purusha seated in Prakriti accepts his relationship with these qualities, then they become the cause of his birth in high and low wombs.

By being situated in Prakriti, the Purusha becomes the enjoyer of the qualities born of Prakriti, and this association, attachment, and love for the qualities is the cause of taking the Purusha to high and low wombs. If he is not seated in Prakriti, does not have 'I-ness' and 'my-ness' in Prakriti (body), and remains established in his own nature, then this Purusha never becomes the enjoyer of pleasure and pain; rather, he becomes equal in pleasure and pain, and becomes healthy (established in self) (Gita 14.24). Therefore, he can be situated in Prakriti and also in his own nature. The only difference is that in being situated in Prakriti he is dependent, and in being situated in his own nature he is naturally independent. Falling into bondage is unnatural for him, and becoming free is natural. Therefore, bondage does not suit him and being free suits him.

Where there is distinction (discrimination) between Prakriti and Purusha, there only is the ignorance of identifying and linking oneself with Prakriti. Out of this ignorance, the Purusha himself identifies with Prakriti. By identifying, he considers himself seated in Prakriti, i.e., situated in Prakriti (body). By being seated in Prakriti, there is 'I-ness' and 'my-ness' in the body. This is the association with qualities. By this association with qualities, the Purusha is bound (Gita 14.5). Being bound by the qualities, the movement of the Purusha is according to the qualities (Gita 14.18).

Connection: In the nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first verses, Prakriti and Purusha were described. Now in the next verse, the Purusha is described with specificity.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The self, settled in a series of bodies of divinities, men etc., which are modifications of Prakrti, becomes attached to happiness, pain etc., resulting from the Sattva and other alities associated with the respective wombs, and hence engages Itself in virtuous and sinful deeds, constituting the means for happiness, misery etc. In order to experience the fruits of those good and evil deeds, It is born again in good and evil wombs. Then It becomes active and conseently is born again as a result of Its activities. As long as It does not cultivate alities like modesty etc., which are the means for realising the self, so long Its entanglement in Samsara continues like this. Thus, it has been declared here that attachment causes births in good and evil wombs.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.20–13.23 jointly): Prakrtim etc. upto parah.  The Material Cause also is beginningless, because it has no other casue.  Modifications : the cloth and the like.  What is known as Material Cause is the basis for the process of cause-and-effect.  But, the Soul, because of Its importance, constitutes the enjoyer.  [Thus] the Material Cause and the Soul have verily an existence of interdependence just as that of the lame and the blind.  Hence,  the nature of the  Soul is described by the authors of the scriptures by nomenclatures having different forms such as  'the Spectator' and so on.  The meaning, intended here is this : The Material Cause, Its modifications, the fourteen types of creation and also the Soul - this is all beginningless and  perennial as it is completely illuminated by the category Brahman and is identical with it.										
  Hence  [the Bhagavat] said :

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Hi, since; purusah, the soul, the experiencer; is prakrtisthah, seated in Nature, which is characterized as ignorance and gets transformed into body and organs, i.e., (since the soul) has become identified with Nature; therefore, bhunkte, [Bhunkte, lit. enjoys, here means 'experiences'.-Tr.] it enjoys, i.e. experiences; gunan, the alities-manifest as happiness, sorrow and delusion; prakrtijan, born of Nature, thinking thus, 'I am happy, sorrowful, deluded, learned.' Even though ignorance continues as a cause, still the main cause of worldly existence, of birth, is the contact, the self-identification, with the alities-happiness,sorrow, and delusion-when they are experienced, as is affirmed by the Upanisadic text, 'What it desires, it resolves' (Br. 4.4.5) [See Sankaracarya's Comm. on this.-Tr.].
That very fact is stated here: Gunasangah, contact with the alities; is karanam, the cause; asya, of its, the soul's, the experiencer's; sad-asad-yoni-janmasu, births in good and evil wombs. Self-identification with the alities is the cause of the experience of births in good and evil wombs. Or the meaning is, 'Self-identification with the alities is the cause or its worldly existence through birth in good and evil wombs,' where the words 'of worldly existence' have to be supplied. The good wombs are he wombs of gods and others; evil wombs are the wombs of gods and others; evil wombs are the wombs of beasts etc. From the force of the context it is to be understood that there is no contradiction in including even human wombs among 'good and evil wombs'.
It amounts to saying that ignorance-called 'being seated in Nature'-and the contact with. i.e. the desire for, the alities are the causes of worldly existence. And this is said so that they can be avoided. And in the scripture Gita it is a well-known fact that knowledge and dispassion, accompanied with renunciation, are the causes of removing this (ignorance and self-identification with the alities). That knowledge about the field and the Knower of the field, too, has been presented earlier. This has also been said in, '৷৷.by realizing which one attains Immortality' (12), etc., through the process of refutation of elements alien (to the Self) and superimposition of alities belonging to others (that are not the Self). [Verse 12 deals with the refutation of alien elements, and vere 13 with the superimposition of alities belonging to others.]
A direct presentation is again being made of that (knowledge) itself:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Having thus spoken of the difference in functions, he says with 'puruṣaḥ' that its enjoyership (bhoktṛtvam) also occurs only due to its contact with the field (kshetra) which is the modification of Nature, and not otherwise. Only when situated in Prakriti (Nature), i.e., situated in the field, does the Jiva (individual soul) experience—becomes the enjoyer of—the qualities born of Prakriti, which are modifications of Sattva etc., through the senses which are the effects of those qualities; but not like the inner controller (Antaryamin) who is unattached, as in the Upanishadic verse: 'The other looks on without eating'. As is said in the Bhagavata (3.26.6): 'Thus, by meditating on the other (Nature), the Purusha attributes to himself the agency of Prakriti in actions that are being performed by the qualities. Consequently, this transmigratory existence, bondage, and dependence, though he is non-doer, lord, witness, and blissful self, happen to him.' And also: 'In the agency of cause and effect, the qualities, which are the substratum of matter, knowledge, and action, constantly bind the Purusha, who is eternally free, under the influence of Maya' (Bhagavata 2.5.19). Therefore, for this Purusha whose imperishable nature (Akshara-svabhava) is obscured by contact with Nature, his attachment to those qualities alone is to be understood as the cause of births in good and evil wombs.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
What was stated as the Purusha's experiencing of pleasure and pain, which is his transmigratory existence (Samsara), what is the cause of that? To this, it is said: 'puruṣaḥ'. Prakriti is Maya. Having falsely identified himself with it, the Purusha, indeed seated in Prakriti, experiences—perceives—the qualities born of Prakriti. Therefore, in births in good and evil wombs, which are the means of perceiving the qualities born of Prakriti, the good wombs are those of gods etc., in which the desirable Sattvika fruit is experienced; the evil wombs are those of beasts etc., in which the undesirable Tamasa fruit is experienced; and the good-and-evil wombs, due to the mixture of righteousness (Dharma) and unrighteousness (Adharma), are those of Brahmanas and other human beings, in which the mixed Rajasika fruit is experienced. Therefore, the cause of this Purusha's birth in those wombs is his attachment to qualities—namely, the identification with Prakriti which consists of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. It does not mean that the unattached Purusha has transmigratory existence by himself. Or, 'guna-sanga' means attachment to the qualities—namely, objects like sound etc., which are of the nature of pleasure, pain, and delusion; that is, desire (kama). This alone is the cause of his birth in good and evil wombs, according to the Upanishadic text: 'As is his desire, so is his resolve; as is his resolve, so is his deed; as is his deed, so is his destiny.' (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4.5). In this view also, the identification with Prakriti is to be understood as the root cause.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Still, how can there be enjoyership (bhoktṛtvam) for the changeless and birthless Purusha? To this, he says: 'puruṣaḥ'. For (hi), because the Purusha is seated in Prakriti—meaning situated by identification in the body which is its effect—therefore he experiences pleasure etc. born of it. And for this Purusha, in those births which occur in good wombs like gods etc., and in evil wombs like animals etc., his attachment to the qualities—namely, the senses which perform virtuous and sinful deeds—is the cause.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
If it is asked, what is the cause of the Purusha's transmigratory existence (Samsara) characterized by the experiencing of pleasure and pain? He says: 'puruṣaḥ', meaning it is caused by the superimposition of identity due to ignorance (Avidya). For (hi), because the Purusha is seated in Prakriti, which is characterized as ignorance, and has identified himself with it, therefore he experiences—perceives—the qualities of Sattva etc. born of Prakriti, which manifest as pleasure, pain, and delusion, thinking 'I am happy, I am miserable, I am deluded, I am wise'. The interpretation of 'seated in Prakriti' as 'situated by identification in the body which is its effect' was not adopted by the Acharya (Shankara), keeping in mind that the identification with the body is also dependent on the superimposition of identity with ignorance, and that it would lead to abandoning the primary meaning. Having stated being seated in Nature as the cause of transmigratory existence characterized by enjoyership, he states the primary cause of birth with 'kāraṇam' (the cause). For this Purusha, the enjoyer, the good and evil wombs are: good wombs are those of gods etc., and evil wombs are those of beasts etc. By the force of mentioning the two kinds of wombs, the intermediate good-and-evil wombs, which are the human wombs, are also to be understood. In those births, the cause is 'guna-sanga' (attachment to qualities)—that is, the identity or attachment with the qualities which are the objects of pleasure, pain, and delusion being experienced; this alone is the primary cause of birth, even though ignorance is present, according to the Upanishadic text: 'As is his desire, so is his resolve; as is his resolve, so is his deed; as is his deed, so is his destiny.' (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4.5). Or, it may be explained by supplying the word 'samsāra', as: 'attachment to qualities is the cause of this transmigratory existence consisting of birth in good and evil wombs'. However, 'attachment to qualities' was not explained by the Acharya (Shankara) as 'identification with Prakriti consisting of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas', keeping in mind that it would be redundant with 'seated in Prakriti' (which means having attained Nature as one's self). Nor did he show it as attachment to the senses that perform virtuous and sinful deeds, keeping in mind that attachment to senses is dependent on attachment to objects, according to the Upanishadic text: 'Indeed, objects are superior to the senses' (Katha Upanishad 1.3.10). Others, however, explain: 'Or, a wise man or an ignorant man, being situated in Prakriti, experiences the qualities, according to the maxim of no distinction from beasts etc. Why is it that the ignorant man is not liberated like the wise man, or why is it that the wise man is not bound like the ignorant man? Raising this doubt, he says: 'kāraṇam' (the cause). Attachment to qualities—namely, body, senses, and objects, which is the obsession in the form of 'this is I, this is mine'—is the cause of birth. For the wise, due to the absence of that, there is no birth. Even though the connection with the body is same, when a demigod (yakṣa) identifies with the body, he alone is pained by the affliction of the body, but not the Jiva who is the owner of the body. When this Jiva identifies with the body, then no other is pained. This is well known. Attachment is the binder, not mere proximity. Therefore, although the connection with the body is same for both the wise and the ignorant, there is a great difference made by attachment and its absence. This is how they describe it. However, the Bhashyakara (Shankaracharya) did not present this meaning, keeping in mind the consistency with the definition of the Purusha in accordance with the introduction 'Know both Nature and Purusha to be beginningless' (Gita 13.19).

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
With the idea that 'the subsequent statement would be contradicted'. In 13.22, in order to address the doubts arising in a part of what was stated, and to avoid tautology between what has been said and what will be said, he restates what was said in detail with 'evam' (thus). For the pure inner self whose sole essence is the bliss of self-experience, the experiencing of external, sensory pleasure and pain cannot be real, but must be superimposed due to a specific attachment, like the redness of a hibiscus flower in a crystal. This doubt is resolved by the first half of the verse starting with 'puruṣaḥ'; to this he says 'puruṣasya' (of the Purusha). The qualities like Sattva etc. are not directly experienceable, because they are supersensuous, being inferred from their effects in the form of pleasure, pain, and delusion. The enjoyership of those pleasures and pains, which is under discussion, has to be established, and that is indicated by the word 'hi' (for). But here, how is the enjoyership of qualities stated as 'experiences the qualities born of Nature'? To this he says 'guna-śabda' (the word qualities). 'In its effects' is the statement of the cause of figurative usage. The word 'sva' (its) refers to the nature of the qualities. Even though the word 'guna' is primary with regard to pleasure and pain, still, since the qualities of Prakriti are intended, it is said to be figurative. For, later also, the word 'guna' refers mostly to Sattva etc. The nature of the Purusha as he really is, is referred to here by the word 'puruṣaḥ'; to this he says 'by nature, consisting only of the bliss of self-experience'. Since the word 'prakṛtistha' (established in nature) is also used in the sense of being healthy (in one's own nature) etc., to exclude that meaning, he explains it as 'united with Prakriti' (nature). By 'born of Prakriti', it is not meant that they reside in Prakriti, because they are perceived as residing in oneself in the form of 'I am happy, I am miserable', and because the view that pleasure and pain, which are modifications of the internal organ, are superimposed on the Self is contrary to the cited authorities. Therefore, only their being conditioned by that is intended; to indicate this, he states their being conditioned by the contact with Prakriti. By 'etc.', desires, aversion, etc., mentioned earlier are included. They too, being the fruits of karma, have to be experienced. Because it ends in Atmanepada and the meaning does not fit, the sense of protecting/ruling is inappropriate here. The sense of eating is also discarded due to its impropriety. Therefore, here, 'bhunkte' means only the experience under discussion. With the idea that they define experience as the direct perception of pleasure and pain present in oneself, he says 'experiences'. Since contact with Nature was stated as the cause of the experience of sensory pleasure and pain for the self whose sole essence is self-experience, with the intention of resolving the doubt 'how can there be that contact with Nature for the pure self?' in the next part, he says 'states the cause of contact with Nature'. Since it is beginningless as a flow, like the seed and the sprout, the fallacies of mutual dependence, circular reasoning, etc., are avoided, and infinite regress is not a flaw; and due to the diversity of past causes in the flows, the diversity of subsequent events is established. He states the fruitfulness of scriptures because attachment to qualities, through prescribed and prohibited actions, causes diverse births for experiencing their fruits. He also shows compatibility with the Upanishadic text on births in good and evil wombs being rooted in karma: 'Those whose conduct has been pleasant will quickly attain a pleasant womb... those whose conduct has been stinking will quickly attain a stinking womb' (Chandogya Upanishad 5.10.7), with 'pūrva-pūrva' (past, past). Since Sattva etc. cannot be the direct object of attachment, with the idea that the word 'guna' is figurative here also as before, he says 'in pleasure, pain, etc. consisting of qualities like Sattva etc.' 'Attachment to pain' means attachment to pain by mistaking it for pleasure; for, in causes of pain like crossing the ocean, one engages due to attachment to a small fraction of pleasure, and they say: 'for men with erroneous knowledge, even a blow feels like pleasure'. Since it is established that whoever desires something has the sense of duty towards that or its means, and since pleasure cannot be created by itself, the Purusha's activity is only towards its means; with this intention, he says 'in those which are its means'. It is also heard: 'As is his desire, so is his resolve...' Because meanings like 'exists/does not exist' do not fit, and according to the Chandogya Upanishad text (5.10.7) by saying that 'sad-asat' means good and bad wombs, the other explanation 'births in the wombs of the good and the bad' (Shankara's) is refuted. By the plural number, the connection of a single Purusha, as a flow, with diverse and infinite good and bad wombs is intended; with this idea, he says: 'then he performs actions, then he is born, etc.' He resolves the doubt: 'Since it is beginningless as a flow, will the flow also be infinite without cessation?' with 'yāvat' (as long as). When it is said that attachment to qualities is the cause of contact with Nature, then by the maxim 'in the absence of cause, there is absence of effect' (Vaisheshika Sutra 1.2.1), by the cessation of attachment to qualities through virtues like humility (amanitva) etc., the flow of births in good and bad wombs will also be cut off; to state this, he says 'this is what has been declared'. The meaning is that although not explicitly stated here, the fact that attachment to qualities is conditioned by the past body connections and is the cause of attaining wombs through karma is stated implicitly in accordance with other scriptures (Shruti and Smriti).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Then what? To this, he says: 'puruṣaḥ'. 'Purusha' is the Lord manifested in the form of Purusha. Being 'prakṛtisthaḥ'—situated in the place of experiencing His own bliss (rasa)—He experiences the qualities born of Prakriti, which means He enjoys other contacts. It does not mean, however, that the Purusha-form's desire to experience the taste of qualities is the cause or reason for births in good and evil wombs.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
An objection is raised: just as the intellect's agency (kartṛtvam) is superimposed on the Purusha, why not superimpose the Purusha's enjoyership (bhoktṛtvam) on the intellect? To prevent this delusion, he says: 'puruṣaḥ'. 'Hi' indicates it is well known. 'Prakṛtisthaḥ' means seated in the aggregate of body, senses, and mind—that is, identified with it. He experiences—perceives—the qualities born of Prakriti, which consist of pleasure, pain, and delusion. But when, in deep sleep, Samadhi, swoon, etc., there is no being seated in Prakriti, then he does not perceive pleasure etc. By this, it is established that pleasure and pain belong only to the limiting adjuncts (Upadhis), and appear due to their existence. The Upanishadic text also says: 'The wise call the Self, when associated with body, senses, and mind, the enjoyer' (Katha Upanishad 1.3.4), thus showing that enjoyership is in the Self only due to its association with senses and mind, and showing that the pure, absolute Self has no enjoyership. How then does this non-enjoyer get bound by Prakriti? To this, he says: 'kāraṇam' (the cause). In this Purusha's births in good and evil wombs—among which those born in good wombs are gods, those born in evil wombs are animals and immovables, and those born in good-and-evil wombs are human beings—in all these three births to be attained, the attachment to qualities, i.e. the obsession with pleasure etc., is the cause or reason. For, the gods are Sattvika, human beings are Rajasika, and animals are Tamasika; the predominance of their respective qualities is the cause of their attaining those wombs. And He will say later: 'Those established in Sattva go upwards' (Gita 14.18), etc. Or, a wise man or an ignorant man, being situated in Prakriti, experiences the qualities, according to the maxim of no distinction from beasts etc. Why is it that the ignorant man is not liberated like the wise man, or why is it that the wise man is not bound like the ignorant man? Raising this doubt, he says: 'kāraṇam' (the cause). Attachment to qualities—namely, body, senses, and objects, which is the obsession in the form of 'this is I, this is mine'—is the cause of birth. For the wise, due to the absence of that, there is no birth. Even though the connection with the body is same, when a demigod (yakṣa) identifies with the body, he alone is pained by the affliction of the body, but not the Jiva who is the owner of the body. And when this Jiva identifies with the body, then no other is pained. This is well known. Attachment is the binder, not mere proximity. Therefore, although the connection with the body is same for both the wise and the ignorant, there is a great difference made by attachment and its absence. This is the idea.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various species.

 This verse is very important for an understanding of how the living entities transmigrate from one body to another. It is explained in the Second Chapter that the living entity is transmigrating from one body to another just as one changes dress. This change of dress is due to his attachment to material existence. As long as he is captivated by this false manifestation, he has to continue transmigrating from one body to another. Due to his desire to lord it over material nature, he is put into such undesirable circumstances. Under the influence of material desire, the entity is born sometimes as a demigod, sometimes as a man, sometimes as a beast, as a bird, as a worm, as an aquatic, as a saintly man, as a bug. This is going on. And in all cases the living entity thinks himself to be the master of his circumstances, yet he is under the influence of material nature. How he is put into such different bodies is explained here. It is due to association with the different modes of nature. One has to rise, therefore, above the three material modes and become situated in the transcendental position. That is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unless one is situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, his material consciousness will oblige him to transfer from one body to another because he has material desires since time immemorial. But he has to change that conception. That change can be effected only by hearing from authoritative sources. The best example is here: Arjuna is hearing the science of God from Kṛṣṇa. The living entity, if he submits to this hearing process, will lose his long-cherished desire to dominate material nature, and gradually and proportionately, as he reduces his long desire to dominate, he comes to enjoy spiritual happiness. In a Vedic mantra it is said that as he becomes learned in association with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he proportionately relishes his eternal blissful life.