Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
mānāpamānayostulyastulyo mitrāripakṣayoḥ .
sarvārambhaparityāgī guṇātītaḥ sa ucyate

Word Meanings:
मानापमानयोः - in honour and dishonour
तुल्यः - the same
तुल्यः - the same
मित्रारिपक्षयोः - to friend and foe
सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी - abandoning all undertakings
गुणातीतः - crossed the Gunas
सः - he
उच्यते - is said.

Life Application:
Same in honor and dishonor, same to friend and foe, abandoning all selfish undertakings—he is said to transcend modes.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
One who is equal in honor and dishonor, equal towards the sides of both friend and foe, and who has renounced all initiative (undertakings)—such a person is said to have transcended the gunas (qualities).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Who is the same in honour and dishonour, the same to friend and foe, abandoning all undertakings  he is said to have transcended the alities.

मानापमानयोः in honour and dishonour? तुल्यः the same? तुल्यः the same? मित्रारिपक्षयोः to friend and foe? सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी abandoning all undertakings? गुणातीतः crossed the Gunas? सः he? उच्यते is said.Commentary He keeps a balanced mind in honour and dishonour. He is the same to friend and foe. He is not affected by the dual throng. He has risen above the Gunas. He rests in his own essential nature as ExistenceKnowledgeBliss Absolute. He abids in his own Self. He is a Gunatita (one who has transcended the alities of Nature) who is not affected by the play of the alities. He keeps an even outlook amidst changes. He maintains a clam eilibrium.He abandons all actions that can bring visible or invisible fruits or results but he does actions that are necessary for the bare maintenance of his body. The alities described in verses 23? 24 and 25? such as indifference? etc.? are the means for attaining liberation. They represent the ideal that you should have before you. The aspirant should cultivate them. But one attains knowledge of the Self when he abides in his own true nature. These attributes form part and parcel of his nature and serve as marks to indicate that he has crossed beyond the three alities.The Lord gives in the following verse the answer to the third estion of Arjuna How does one go beyond the three alities

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Who looks equally upon honour and dishonour, loves friends and foes alike, abandons all initiative, such is he who transcends the Qualities.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The general picture of the person who has transcended the three gunas, sketched in the preceding verses, is here clarified further so that we may observe it closely and subtly.

To remain equal in honor and dishonor is the mark of a wise person. A person established firmly in his divine nature is not afraid of life, because his perspective of looking at the world is completely different from that of the ignorant. An ego-centric evaluation of life forces us to regard honor and dishonor as acceptable and rejectable, respectively.

Even in worldly life, we see that people who sacrifice their lives for the country long for conditions that others consider humiliating. But without heeding society's honor or dishonor, such people love and serve their generation with full enthusiasm. On the day of discovering the principle of buoyancy, Archimedes felt no humiliation running naked down the street shouting 'Eureka! Eureka!', though on any other day it would be different. Honor and dishonor are judgments of the intellect, which change from place to place and time to time. For the person who has risen above the level of ego, both are equal; a crown of thorns is as welcome as a crown of roses.

SAME TO FRIEND AND FOE: Just as we do not consider one part of our body as an enemy and another part as a friend, so also a person who has attained the knowledge of the oneness of the Self harbors no friendship or enmity toward anyone. Nevertheless, other people may certainly hold feelings of friend or foe toward him, but he remains equal toward both. From the standpoint of Self-realization, the wise man knows that 'they are all Myself.'

ABANDONING ALL UNDERTAKINGS (SARVARAMBHA PARITYAGI): Undertaking means action. This does not mean that the person who has transcended the gunas becomes inactive. It implies that in his actions he has neither the pride of agency nor selfishness. The word 'arambha' includes all those actions motivated by ego and selfishness to acquire, hoard, and establish ownership over many objects. For the ignorant soul, these actions are natural. The ego-less self-realized person, inspired by God, acts as a divine person in this world for the welfare of all.

Through the above characteristics, a person is said to have transcended the gunas. In these verses, the second question of Arjuna has been answered.

Sri Shankaracharya writes in his commentary that a seeker desirous of liberation should adopt these qualities as means (sadhana). Once established in knowledge, these qualities will become his natural characteristics, self-experienced. These are the main characteristics of a person who has transcended the gunas.

Arjuna's third question was: how does one transcend the three gunas? Answering this, the Lord says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Who remains eal to honour and to dishonour, and eal to the sides of [both] the friend and the foe; and who has given up all fruits of his initiatives-he is said to have transcended the Strands.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who is the same in honour and dishonour, and the same to friend and foe, and how has abandoned all enterprises - he is said to have risen above the Gunas.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
He who is the same under honour and dishonour, who is eally disposed both towards the side of the friend and of the foe, who has renounced all enterprise,-he is said to have gone beyond the alities.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The meaning of 'tulyatva' (equanimity/sameness) has already been stated earlier.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Saying that a person who has transcended the gunas can be known from this reason as well, he introduces with 'kincha' (furthermore). 'Mana' means honor/respect, and 'apamana' means insult/dishonor. He who remains non-differentiated toward the sides of those who are viewed by others as friends and foes—that is, he does not take anyone's side—is called 'tulyah' (equal). Raising an objection that since a wise person lacks the perception of friends etc., it is inappropriate to say 'he is equal to friend and foe', he answers with 'yadyapi' (although). Raising another doubt that upon renouncing all actions, even bodily maintenance would not occur due to lack of motive, he clarifies with 'deha' etc. One possessing these specified attributes should be known as 'gunatita' (transcending the gunas), as stated by 'guna' etc. What has been mentioned regarding indifference etc. is achievable through effort prior to the dawn of Knowledge, to be practiced as means to Knowledge by an eligible seeker. But upon the dawn of Knowledge, these stated attributes become firmly established in the jivanmukta (liberated soul) as self-experienced characteristics. Showing the division in these attributes, he concludes with 'udasinavat' etc.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He who is equal in honor and dishonor, equal towards the sides of both friend and foe, and who has renounced all initiative (undertakings)—such a person is said to have transcended the gunas.

EXPLANATION:
'Dhirah, sama-duhkha-sukhah': By knowing the truth of the eternal and non-eternal, essential and non-essential, and being established in the self-evident true nature, the person who has transcended the gunas is called steadfast/patient (dhira). Favorable and unfavorable circumstances coming according to past deeds are called pleasure and pain. A gunatita person remains equal in both; external conditions cannot create modifications in his mind.
'Svasthah': In the true Self there is no pleasure or pain at all; pleasure and pain are merely illumined by the Self. Hence, he does not become the enjoyer of transient pleasure and pain, but abides in his eternal nature.
'Sama-lostasma-kanchanah': He has neither attraction nor aversion toward a clod of earth, stone, or gold. But in behavior, he treats each appropriately.
'Tulya-priyapriyah': He remains equal in the success or failure of actions, or in attaining or not attaining their immediate fruits.
'Tulya-nindatma-samstutih': He is unperturbed by praise or blame, because he has no identification with name or fame.
'Mana-apamanayoh tulyah': Honor and dishonor are related to the body. Since he has no identification with the body, external honor or dishonor has no impact on him.
'Tulyo mitraripakshayoh': He remains equal toward friend and foe. In reality, he harbors no friend or enemy in his heart, hence there is no partiality in his dealings.
'Sarvarambha-parityagi': He renounces the initiation of all egoistic and selfish undertakings for acquiring wealth or enjoyment. His actions proceed naturally without desire or attachment.
'Gunatitah sa ucyate': Thus, such a person whose heart is free from ego and possessiveness, and who abides in the transcendental Self, is spoken of as having transcended the gunas.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
He who is 'alike in pleasure and pain,' namely, whose mind is eal in pleasure and pain; 'who dwells in his self,' namely, who dwells in his self because his love for the self keeps his mind in eanimity in pleasure and pain arising from the birth, death etc., of his sons and other relatives and friends, and who, because of this, 'looks upon a clod, a stone and a piece of gold as of eal value,' who conseently remains the same towards things dear or hateful, i.e., who treats alike the worldly objects desired and undesired; who is 'intelligent,' namely, proficient in discrimination between the Prakrti and the self; who, therefore, regards blame and praise as alike, namely, who treats with eality praise and blame looking upon good and evil alities as born of identification with bodies such as those of men etc., and as such unconnected with his real self; who is the 'same in honour and dishonour' because these are feelings based on the misconception that the body is the self, and as a conseence of such discrimination between the body and the self, 'looks alike on friend and foe,' because he understands that ther is no connection between them and himself; and who has thus abandoned all entrprises in which embodied beings are involved - he who is like this, is said to have risen above the Gunas.

Now Sri Krsna states the main method (technie) for transcending such Gunas:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Udasinavad etc. upto ucyate. He, who is ignorant i.e.,  he who does not distinguish  [even the existence and nonexistence of the Strands] - he alone is wise, because of his correct  knowledge.  That is why he is not shaken i.e., he does not fall from his own nature.  The means in this regard is the firm conviction :  'The exertion that  [in found in my body etc.] is nothing but the innate nature of the body, the sense-organs etc.; and I am unconcerned with any fruit  [of any action]'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Further, tulyah, he who is the same, unperturbed; mana-apamanayoh, under honour and dishonour; tulyah, who is eally disposed; mitra-ari-paksayoh, both towards the side of the friend and of the foe-although from their own standpoint some may be unattached, still, in others' view they may appear to be siding either with friends or foes; hence it is said, 'eally disposed both towards the side of the friend and of the foe'; sarva-arambha-parityagi, who has renounced all enterprise (-those which are undertaken are arambhah, actions intended for seen or unseen results-), i.e. who is apt to give up all undertakings, who has given up all actions other than those needed merely for the maintenance of the body; sah, he; ucyate, is said to have; gunatitah, gone beyond the alities.
The disciplines leading to the state of transcendence of the alities, which have been stated (in the verses) beginning from 'he who, sitting like one indifferent,' and ending with 'he is said to have gone beyond the alities,' have to be practised by a monk, a seeker of Liberation, so long as they are to be achieved through effort. But when they become firmly ingrained, they become the indications, perceivable to himself, of a monk who has transcended the alities.
Now the Lord gives the reply to the estion, 'And how does he transcend the alties?'

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
By 'sama-duhkha-sukhah' (verse 24) etc., an absolute feeling of equality toward pleasure etc. is stated—in order to dispel any misconception regarding this, he uses the word 'tulyatva' etc. The inner meaning is that the word expressing equality should be understood according to the manner explained previously.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Mana-apamanayoh' etc. One who renounces all enterprises arising from embodiment—such a person on the path of knowledge is said to be 'gunatita' (transcending the gunas).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Mana' means honor or respect; 'apamana' means dishonor or disrespect. He who is equal in both is devoid of joy and sorrow. The distinction is that praise and blame are verbal, whereas honor and dishonor are specific physical and mental attitudes even without words. (Even if there is a textual variant of 'pa' or 'va', the meaning remains the same.) 'Equal toward friend and foe' means that just like the side of friends, the side of enemies is also not an object of his hatred, or that he himself is free from showing favor or disfavor to either. 'Sarvarambha-parityagi': Those which are undertaken are actions, called 'arambha'; one whose nature is to renounce all of them is a renouncer of all undertakings—meaning, one who renounces all actions except those required merely for bodily sustenance. One possessing the conduct described from 'udasinavad asinah' (verse 23) onward is said to have transcended the gunas. What has been described as indifference etc. is achievable through effort prior to the dawn of Knowledge, to be practiced as a discipline by a seeker; but once Knowledge dawns, these attributes remain effortlessly in the jivanmukta who has transcended the gunas as his natural characteristics.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore—'Mana-apamanayoh' etc. He who is equal in honor and dishonor, equal toward the side of friends and the side of foes, and whose nature is to renounce all undertakings (enterprises) aimed at seen or unseen results—one endowed with such conduct is said to have transcended the gunas.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
'Mana' means honor/respect, and 'apamana' means dishonor/insult. He who is equal, unperturbed, in both honor and dishonor; he who is equal toward the sides of those who are viewed by others as friend and foe—meaning he does not take anyone's side. Those actions which are undertaken for seen or unseen results are called 'arambha' (undertakings); one whose nature is to renounce all such undertakings is a renouncer of all initiatives—meaning one who renounces all actions except those needed merely for bodily maintenance. One who is of such conduct is said to have transcended the gunas. Up to 'sarvarambha-parityagi', as long as these characteristics are to be achieved through effort, they are to be practiced by a detached seeker of liberation as means to transcend the gunas; but when firmly established, being natural to the liberated soul who has transcended the gunas, they become effortlessly accomplished characteristics.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Equanimity in pleasure and pain etc. has already been well taught earlier. If the word 'svasthah' were taken merely to denote freedom from modification and non-compliance with the gunas, it would be tautological; but the specification of abiding in the Self is useful as the cause for explaining multi-faceted equanimity of mind—with this intention he says 'svasmin sthitah' (abiding in one's Self). He explains its meaning as 'svatmaika-priyatvena' (owing to the Self alone being dear). Although terms like pleasure-pain, agreeable-disagreeable do not differ significantly in meaning, tautology is avoided through the nuance of worldly convention. 'Tata eva' means 'owing to being abiding in the Self'. Since unshakeability in the presence of agreeable or disagreeable things is already established by words like 'tulya-priyapriyah', the specific intellectual quality implied here by 'dhiratvam' (steadfastness)—showing how it serves as the cause for equanimity toward blame and praise—is qualified as 'prakrtyatma-viveka-kusalah' (expert in discriminating between Nature and the Self). Up to 'dhirah', the internal characteristics have been stated. Now, intending to answer the question regarding external conduct and indicators, he states 'tata eva tulya-nindatma-samstutih'. (Some hold that 'sama-duhkha' etc. refer to external indicators.) Praise and blame consist of highlighting virtues and defects. For one who perceives the Self as distinct from the body, when praise or blame occurs based on bodily virtues/defects like beauty or deformity, joy etc. cannot arise, just as when others are praised or blamed—this is explained by 'atmani' etc. Following the principle that 'worldly people honor those who honor them,' people honor those who praise them and despise those who revile them; modes of honor and dishonor are established in worldly usage and scriptures. There, 'those who honor are friends, and those who despise are foes'—with this intended order of worldly view, he says 'tatprayukta' etc. Since verbal praise and blame were mentioned separately, here the terms 'mana' and 'apamana' refer to mental and physical behavior. Even for a person of equal intellect who has transcended the gunas, the sides of friends and foes imagined by others' intellect exist. 'Arambha' is that which is initiated, namely action, such as retaliation etc. To exclude initiatives aimed at liberation, he specifies 'dehitva-prayukta'—meaning one who renounces all worldly undertakings. This alone is the external indicator of conduct. Through internal non-hatred etc., and external renunciation of initiatives etc., the person who has transcended the gunas is characterized. And those very things are the means to transcend the gunas—thus all three questions have been answered.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Furthermore, 'Mana-apamanayoh tulyah': He remains equal in honor and dishonor caused by the Lord, regarding them as coming from his own Beloved Lord. 'Tulyo mitraripakshayoh': When a devotee considers him as his own in the friend's side, he remains equal through divine perspective; and in the enemy's side, when demonic people consider him as belonging to the Lord and act accordingly, thinking 'it is appropriate for them to think so,' he remains equal by not considering their defects. 'Sarvarambha-parityagi': One whose nature is to renounce all objects and initiatives of empirical experience. One who possesses such conduct is said to be 'gunatita' (transcending the gunas)—this is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Now, for a yogi situated in the fourth state (stage of yoga) called 'sattvapatti', in the absence of samadhi-bliss there is no self-perceived mark; since duality is sublated by the ascertainment of Truth, his marks and conduct are perceiveable only by others—this is explained by 'mana' etc. Just as an expert examiner is devoid of joy or sorrow upon gaining or losing a counterfeit coin and does not undertake effort to acquire it, whereas a foolish person is affected by both and undertakes effort for its gain; similarly, the wise man, perceiving duality to be like a mirage in a desert, remains equal in honor and dishonor or toward the sides of friend and foe, and does not undertake effort to gain one or avoid the other—hence he is said to be 'gunatita' (transcending the gunas). Everywhere the meaning of words is clear.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame and infamy, who is always free from contaminating association, who is transcendental to all these material qualities, is indeed eligible for liberation.

 Arjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them one after another. In these verses, Kṛṣṇa first indicates that a person transcendentally situated has no envy and does not hanker for anything. When a living entity stays in this material world embodied by the material body, it is to be understood that he is under the control of one of the three modes of material nature. When he is actually out of the body, then he is out of the clutches of the material modes of nature. But as long as he is not out of the material body, he should be neutral. He should engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord so that his identity with the material body will automatically be forgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he acts only for sense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to Kṛṣṇa, sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need this material body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of the material body. The qualities of the material modes in the body will act, but as spirit soul the self is aloof from such activities. How does he become aloof? He does not desire to enjoy the body, nor does he desire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally situated, the devotee becomes automatically free. He need not try to become free from the influence of the modes of material nature. The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situated person. The materially situated person is affected by so-called honor and dishonor offered to the body, but the transcendentally situated person is not affected by such false honor and dishonor. He performs his duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and does not mind whether a man honors or dishonors him. He accepts things that are favorable for his duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, otherwise he has no necessity of anything material, either a stone or gold. He takes everyone as his dear friend who helps him in his execution of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and he does not hate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything on an equal level because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing to do with material existence. Social and political issues do not affect him, because he knows the situation of temporary upheavals and disturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He can attempt anything for Kṛṣṇa, but for his personal self he does not attempt anything. By such behavior one becomes actually transcendentally situated.