Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
bījaṃ māṃ sarvabhūtānāṃ viddhi pārtha sanātanam .
buddhirbuddhimatāmasmi tejastejasvināmaham

Word Meanings:
बीजं - the seed
मां - Me
सर्वभूतानां - of all living beings
विद्धि - know
पार्थ - O son of Pritha
सनातनम् - eternal (primeval)
बुद्धिर्बुद्धिमतामस्मि - intellect of the intelligent I am
तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम् - splendour of the splendid I am

Life Application:
Know the divine as the eternal seed of all beings, the intelligence of the intelligent, and radiance of the splendid.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am the splendour of the splendid.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am the splendour of the splendid.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
O Partha, know Me to be the eternal, imperishable seed of all created beings; I am the keen intellect of the intelligent, and the resplendent valour of the splendid.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am the splendour of the splendid.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am the splendour of the splendid.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am the splendour of the splendid.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am the splendour of the splendid.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya states: "Seed of all beings"—Lord Sri Hari, the eternal primeval Cause and promptor of intellect in the wise, is the ultimate seed of all universe.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandagiri states: Lord Vasudeva is the eternal primeval seed of all creation; the wisdom of the wise and the splendour of the resplendent are manifestations of the Lord Himself.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am the splendour of the splendid.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Sri Ramanuja states: I am the eternal germinating seed of all moving and unmoving beings, the sharp intellect of the wise, and the formidable splendour of the resplendent.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta states: O Partha, know Me to be the eternal seed of all beings. I am the intellect of the intelligent and splendour of the resplendent. I am the strength of the strong devoid of lust and attachment, and in all beings, desire uncontrary to Dharma.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Shankaracharya states: "Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, the splendour of the splendid"—Lord Vasudeva is the uncreated eternal seed of all manifestation and the inner strength of all human excellence.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha states: Lord Vishnu is the primary source of intellect and splendour; without Vishnu"s grace, sharpness of mind or power of glory cannot exist.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya states: The eternal seed of all beings and the wisdom of the intelligent are the essential qualities of Lord Krishna.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati states: "Eternal seed"—unconditioned Supreme Brahman is the root cause of all effects, manifesting as intellect and splendour.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Know Me, O Partha, to be the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am the splendour of the splendid.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanapati states: Scriptural exposition of the Lord"s role as the Universal Cause and the essence of intellect and glory.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha states: Lord Vasudeva is the eternal seed of all beings and the inner controller of discernment in the wise.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states: Lord Krishna is the eternal seed of all worlds; the wisdom of the intelligent is the light of His compassion.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelakantha states: "Eternal seed of all beings"—Substratum Brahman is the uncreated eternal seed of all superimposed world.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O son of Partha, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.