Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śrībhagavānuvāca .
paśya me pārtha rūpāṇi śataśo.atha sahasraśaḥ .
nānāvidhāni divyāni nānāvarṇākṛtīni ca

Word Meanings:
पश्य - behold
मे - My
पार्थ - O Partha
रूपाणि - forms
शतशः - by hundreds
अथ - and
सहस्रशः - by thousands
नानाविधानि - of different sorts
दिव्यानि - divine
नानावर्णाकृतीनि - of various colours and
च - and.

Life Application:
Behold the manifold divine forms of various colors, shapes, and wondrous aspects throughout the cosmic expanse.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Sri Bhagavan said: O Partha, behold My divine forms, hundreds and thousands of different kinds, and of various colours and shapes.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Blessed Lord said  Behold, O Arjuna, forms of Mine, by the hundreds and thousands, of different sorts, divine, and of various colours and shapes.

पश्य behold? मे My? पार्थ O Partha? रूपाणि forms? शतशः by hundreds? अथ and? सहस्रशः by thousands? नानाविधानि of different sorts? दिव्यानि divine? नानावर्णाकृतीनि of various colours and shapes? च and.Commentary Divyani Divine supernatural.Satasah? Sahasrasah By the hundreds and thousands -- countless.O Arjuna? I want you to behold the Cosmic Form. All beings and entities are there. The fat and the lean? the short and the tall? the red and the black? the active and the passive? the rich and the poor? the intelligent and the dull? the healthy and the sick? the noisy and the silent? those that are awake? those that are asleep? the beautiful and the ugly? and all grades of beings with their distinctive marks are all there. The blueness of the sky? the yellowness of the silk? the redness of the twilight? the blackness of the coal? the whiteness of the snow? and the greenness of the leaves will be seen by you. You will also behold the objects of various shapes.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Lord Shri Krishna replied: Behold, O Arjuna! My celestial forms, by hundred and thousands, various in kind, in colour and in shape.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
If the fundamental element of all ornaments is gold, then every ornament in the universe must be available in the total gold (sum-total of gold). It is relatively easy to see gold in an ornament, because that is a vision perceived by the senses, meaning it is sensory. But to see all the ornaments of various shapes, sizes, and colours in the sum-total of gold is more difficult, because that is a vision given by the intellect, meaning it is intellectual perception. Keeping this in mind, when we read the Lord's statement, His intention becomes self-evident. Behold My celestial forms in hundreds and thousands, of different kinds, shapes, and colours. Lord Krishna did not need to assume His cosmic form because Arjuna only had to see the form standing before him. But unfortunately, he did not possess the appropriate instrument of vision to see the object to be seen, and therefore, Arjuna could not see all that was already present in Lord Krishna. A telescope is used to view a distant star or any other object. But just by being on the axis of that instrument, the object cannot be seen. To see it, the telescope has to be adjusted so that the object comes into the field of view of the keen observer. In the same way, Krishna did not transform Himself into a cosmic form, but only helped Arjuna make an internal adjustment so that he could behold the universal form existing in Lord Krishna. That is why the Lord says, 'Behold.' In this verse, He lists those objects of vision. Which are those divine forms? He explains in the next verse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The Bhagavat said  Behold,  O son of Prtha, My divine forms in hundreds and in thousands and of varied nature and of varied colours and varied shapes.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Lord said  Behold My forms, O Arjuna, hundreds upon thousands, manifold, divine, varied in hue and shape.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The Blessed Lord said  O son of Prtha, behold My forms in (their) hundreds and in thousands, of different kinds, celestial, and of various colours and shapes.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
In order to reassure His extremely devoted friend Arjuna by promising to fulfill his request, the Blessed Lord spoke thus.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The Blessed Lord said — O son of Pritha! Now behold My hundreds and thousands of divine forms of various kinds, and of various colours and shapes.

Commentary — 'paśya me pārtha rūpāṇi śataśo'tha sahasraśaḥ' — Hearing Arjuna's hesitant and modest prayer, the Lord became extremely pleased. Therefore, addressing Arjuna as 'Partha', He says, 'Behold My forms.' Behold not just three or four, but hundreds and thousands of forms, i.e., countless forms. Just as the Lord said regarding His manifestations (vibhuti) that there is no end to them, similarly here, the Lord points out the infinitude of His forms.
'nānāvidhāni divyāni nānāvarṇākṛtīni ca' — Now the Lord describes the characteristics of those forms, stating that they are of various structures. Their colours are also varied, i.e., some of one colour, some of another—yellow, red, etc. Even within a single form, there are various colours. The shapes of those forms are also diverse, i.e., some small, some fat, some tall, some broad, etc.
Just as a tiny particle of earth is also earth itself, in the same way, being a tiny fraction of the Lord's infinite, boundless Cosmic Form, this world too is indeed the Cosmic Form. However, it does not appear as the divine Cosmic Form to everyone, but rather manifests only as the world. This is because man's vision is directed not towards the Lord, but towards the transient world. Just as when the Lord incarnates, He does not manifest in His divine form before everyone (Gita 7.25), but appears only as a human being, similarly the Cosmic Form of the Lord appears before everyone only as the world, i.e., everyone sees this Cosmic Form as the world. But here, the Lord, manifesting Himself directly in His divine, imperishable Cosmic Form, says to Arjuna, 'Behold My divine forms.'

Connection — In the preceding verse, the Lord spoke of seeing various colours and shapes in His Cosmic Form. Now, in the next verse, He speaks of seeing the demigods.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The Lord said  Behold My forms which are the foundation of all, hundreds upon thousands, varied and possessing manifold modes. They are divine, i.e., supernatural. They are multi-formed and multi-coloured like white, black etc. And they are of varied configurations. Behold that form!

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O son of Prtha, pasya, behold; me, My; rupani, forms; satasah, in (their) hundreds; atha, and; sahasrasah, in thousands, i.e. in large numbers. And they are nana-vidhani, of different kinds; divyani, celestial, supernatural; and nana-varna-akrtini, of various colours and shapes-forms which have different (nana) colours (varna) such as blue, yellow, etc. as also (different) shapes (akrtayah), having their parts differently arranged.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Thus requested, intending to show His wondrous imperishable form, the Lord prepares Arjuna to be attentive by using the word 'pasya' (behold) in four verses. In 'pasya me partha rupani' (behold My forms, O Partha), the plural 'rupani' (forms) is used because there are many forms within the immutable and imperishable supreme nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Thus requested by His extremely devoted devotee Arjuna, the Blessed Lord said: 'Behold' (pasya). Here, by repeating the word 'behold' in four successive verses, the Lord makes Arjuna attentive, implying: 'I am going to show you highly wondrous forms, so be alert.' 'Hundreds and thousands' indicates infinite or unlimited forms. And behold My forms, which are of different kinds (manifold), celestial (extremely wonderful), and of various colours and shapes (having diverse, distinct colours like blue, yellow, etc., and distinct arrangements of limbs). The imperative mood 'behold' (pasya) is used here in the sense of capability or fitness, meaning, 'O Partha, make yourself fit to behold them!'

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Thus requested, intending to display His highly wondrous form, the Blessed Lord prepares Arjuna to be attentive, speaking the four verses starting with 'Behold' (pasya). Although the form is essentially one, due to its manifold nature, the plural 'rupani' (forms) is used. Behold My forms which are infinite (unlimited), of different kinds, and celestial (supernatural). 'Colours' refer to white, black, etc. 'Shapes' refer to the specific arrangements of limbs. Those which possess various (nana) colours and shapes are 'nana-varna-akrtini'.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Being thus prompted, the Blessed Lord spoke: 'Behold My hundreds and thousands, i.e., innumerable forms, of different kinds (manifold), celestial (supernatural), which possess various colours like blue, yellow, etc., and shapes (specific arrangements of limbs).' Since you are the son of Pritha and My beloved friend, therefore, indicating that you should behold them, He addresses you as 'O Partha'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Showing the connection of the Lord's statement beginning with 'behold' (pasya), which arises from Arjuna's question and represents a special state of readiness, he (Ramanuja) says: 'evam' (thus).
Contemplating the manner to be described later, he says 'sarvasrayani' (foundations of all). Being a Bahuvrihi compound, it is in the neuter gender. These are infinite abodes such as the solar orb, etc. Or, the word 'asraya' (refuge/foundation) is metaphorically or by a variation of intent used to mean 'asrita' (those who depend on Him).
By 'hundreds and thousands', He shows that He possesses infinite non-material (aprakrita) spiritual bodies, which transcend and encompass all classifications like Para, Vyuha, Vibhava, etc. The form that exists in one solar orb has its identical countless forms in the solar orbs of infinite universes. The same applies to other forms like the Cosmic Form (Vishvarupa), etc.
Some say that this meaning is also intended by the Upanishadic declaration: 'He became similar in form to each form' (Katha Upanishad 5.9-10). The command 'behold' (pasya) is uttered with the intention: 'I shall make it possible for you to see.'
By 'nana-vidhani' (of different kinds), He implies the infinite variety of specific attributes in each form—such as ornaments, weapons, insignia, and the number of arms; hence he says: 'nana-prakarani' (of various modes).
By 'aprakritani' (non-material): here, the word 'divya' (celestial) does not mean 'dwelling in heaven', because His pervasiveness over the earth, etc., will be described later; rather, it refers to the essential difference of His divine substance from material nature, which must necessarily be asserted.
The multi-colouredness (nana-varnatva) is due to the variation of His forms—white, red, yellow, and black—across different Yugas in His fourfold manifestations (Vasudeva, etc.), and in other incarnations, in accordance with the meditations of the devotees seeking respective fruits. By the word 'akriti' (shape), He means the specific structural configurations corresponding to gods, humans, animals, etc.; hence he says: 'nana-karani' (of varied shapes).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Being thus requested, intending to show that form, the Lord makes Arjuna attentive through the four verses starting with 'Behold' (pasya). The address 'O Partha' (son of His devotee Pritha) implies: 'I am showing this to you out of My grace.' The underlying idea is that otherwise, if there were any desire to see something other than the Supreme Person (Purushottama), He would not have granted him the experience of this divine nectar (rasa). 'Me' means Mine. 'Hundreds and thousands' indicates innumerable forms, or as many hundreds and thousands as you desire to see. 'Nanavidhani' means forms that yield various fruits. 'Divyani' means celestial, supernatural, and playful (sportive/lilatmaka), not created merely for the sake of exhibition. And likewise, 'nana-varna-akrtini' refers to those forms that possess various, i.e., many colours like white, red, etc., and shapes, which are specific arrangements of limbs.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Being thus requested, the Blessed Lord said: 'Behold' (pasya). By saying 'hundreds', etc., He has declared their infinitude. And they are of various colours and shapes.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Pṛthā, see now My opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine and multicolored forms.

 Arjuna wanted to see Kṛṣṇa in His universal form, which, although a transcendental form, is just manifested for the cosmic manifestation and is therefore subject to the temporary time of this material nature. As the material nature is manifested and not manifested, similarly this universal form of Kṛṣṇa is manifested and nonmanifested. It is not eternally situated in the spiritual sky like Kṛṣṇa’s other forms. As far as a devotee is concerned, he is not eager to see the universal form, but because Arjuna wanted to see Kṛṣṇa in this way, Kṛṣṇa reveals this form. This universal form is not possible to be seen by any ordinary man. Kṛṣṇa must give one the power to see it.