Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
paśyādityānvasūnrudrānaśvinau marutastathā .
bahūnyadṛṣṭapūrvāṇi paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata

Word Meanings:
पश्य - behold
आदित्यान् - the Adityas
वसून् - the Vasus
रुद्रान् - the Rudras
अश्िवनौ - the Asvins
मरुतः - the Maruts
तथा - also
बहूनि - many
अदृष्टपूर्वाणि - never seen before
पश्य - see
आश्चर्याणि - wonders
भारत - O Bharata.

Life Application:
Contemplate the cosmic forces of nature and celestial beings, marveling at the infinite wonders of creation.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Bharata! Behold in Me the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the twin Asvins and the Maruts; and also behold many other wonders never seen before.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the two Asvins and also the Maruts; behold many wonders never seen before, O Arjuna.

पश्य behold? आदित्यान् the Adityas? वसून् the Vasus? रुद्रान् the Rudras? अश्िवनौ the (two) Asvins? मरुतः the Maruts? तथा also? बहूनि many? अदृष्टपूर्वाणि never seen before? पश्य see? आश्चर्याणि wonders? भारत O Bharata.Commentary Adityas? Vasus? Rudras and Maruts have already been described in the previous chapter.Not these alone Behold also many other wonders never seen before by you or anybody else in this world.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Behold thou the Powers of Nature: fire, earth, wind and sky; the sun, the heavens, the moon, the stars; all forces of vitality and of healing; and the roving winds. See the myriad wonders revealed to none but thee.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Among the forms to be seen, the Lord enumerates only the important deities. Even in the secular world, while describing a gathering of people, only some of the prestigious individuals present there are named, who represent that community. Here also, some helplessness seems to reflect in the Lord's words regarding the inability to describe this cosmic form, when He says: behold also many other wonders never seen before. Many names mentioned here have already been described in the previous chapters. The only new name here is that of the Asvini Kumaras. They are considered to be the two sons of the Sun, who have the faces of horses, and these two brothers, famous by the name of Asvini Kumaras, are called the physicians of the gods. In some places they are considered as symbols of dawn and dusk, whereas in other places they are called symbols of the stars of these two times. By summarizing the forms to be seen in the cosmic form, Lord Krishna has further increased the curiosity of His disciple Arjuna. Therefore, he wants to know where he should see these forms, to which He says -

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the twin Asvins, and the Maruts;  O son of Pandu, behold also many wonders that had never been seen before.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the two Asvins and the Maruts. Behold, O Arjuna, many marvels never seen before.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
See the Adiyas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the two Asvins and the Maruts. O scion of the Bharata dynasty, behold also the many wonders not seen before.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
It having been said, 'Behold the divine forms', He enumerates the same briefly: 'Behold the Adityas' etc. The connection is, 'behold the Maruts likewise'. What was described as 'of various kinds', He clarifies by the word 'many' ('bahuni'). 'Never seen before' ('adrstapurvani') means not seen previously. What was described as 'of various colors and shapes', He expresses by the word 'wonders' ('ascaryani').

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Arjuna, scion of the Bharata dynasty! Behold the twelve Adityas, the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the two Asvins, and the forty-nine Maruts. Behold also many wonderful forms that you have never seen before.

Commentary—'paśyādityānvasūnrudrānaśvinau marutastathā'—
The twelve 'Adityas' are the sons of Aditi, namely: Dhata, Mitra, Aryama, Shukra, Varuna, Ansha, Bhaga, Vivasvan, Pusha, Savita, Tvashta, and Vishnu (Mahabharata, Adi. 65. 15-16).
The eight 'Vasus' are: Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Ahas, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha, and Prabhasa (Mahabharata, Adi. 66. 18).
The eleven 'Rudras' are: Hara, Bahurupa, Tryambaka, Aparajita, Vrishakapi, Shambhu, Kapardi, Raivata, Mrigavyadha, Sharva, and Kapali (Harivamsa 1. 3. 51-52).
There are two 'Asvini-kumaras'. Both these brothers are the physicians of the gods.
The forty-nine 'Maruts' are: Sattvajyoti, Aditya, Satyajyoti, Tiryagjyoti, Sajyoti, Jyotishman, Harita, Ritajit, Satyajit, Sushena, Senajit, Satyamitra, Abhimitra, Harimitra, Krita, Satya, Dhruva, Dharta, Vidharta, Vidharaya, Dhvanta, Dhuni, Ugra, Bhima, Abhiyu, Sakshipa, Idrik, Anyadrik, Yadrik, Pratikrit, Rik, Samiti, Sanrambha, Idriksha, Purusha, Anyadriksha, Chetasa, Samita, Samidriksha, Pratidriksha, Maruti, Sarata, Deva, Disha, Yajuh, Anudrik, Sama, Manusha, and Vish (Vayu Purana 67. 123-130)—behold all of them in My cosmic form.
The twelve Adityas, eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, and two Asvini-kumaras—these thirty-three crore (thirty-three kinds of) deities are the chief among all gods. The Maruts are also mentioned among gods, but these forty-nine Maruts are considered separate from these thirty-three types of gods, because they all became gods from demons. Therefore, the Lord also used the word 'tatha' (and likewise) to mention the Maruts separately.
'bahūnyadṛṣṭapūrvāṇi paśyāścaryāni bhārata'—You have never seen these forms before with your eyes, nor heard of them with your ears, nor contemplated them in your mind, nor imagined them with your intellect. Your attention has never gone towards these forms. See all these many previously unseen forms directly now.
Upon seeing these forms, one is struck with wonder—'Oh! Does the Lord possess such forms too?' Behold such marvelous forms.

Link—On being commanded by the Lord to see the cosmic form, Arjuna might have a curiosity: 'Where should I see this form?' Therefore, the Lord says—

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Behold in My single form (i.e., the many forms in the one form revealed to Arjuna), the twelve Adityas, eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, the two Asvins and forty-nine Maruts. This is just illustrative. Behold all those things directly perceived in this world and those described in the Sastras, and also many marvels, not seen before in all the worlds and in all the Sastras.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Pasya, see; adityan, the twelve Adityas; vasun, the eight Vasus; rudran, the eleven Rudras; asvinau, the two Asvins; and amarutah, the Maruts, who are divided into seven groups of seven each. Bharata, O scion of the Bharata dynasty; pasya, behold; tatha, also; bahuni, the many other; ascaryani, wonders; adrstapurvani, not seen before-by you or anyone else in the human world.
Not only this much,-

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Moreover, in this very place, 'Behold the Adityas' etc. Behold many wonders; behold the wonders which consist of the coexistence of mutually contradictory attributes in one place.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Having said, 'Behold the divine forms' (in the previous verse), He enumerates the same in brief in two verses, beginning with 'Behold the Adityas' etc. Behold the twelve Adityas, the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the two Asvins, and the forty-nine Maruts (seven groups of seven each); the meaning is, behold other gods as well in the same manner. 'Many others never seen before' means not seen previously in the human world either by you or by anyone else. 'Behold the wonders' means wonderful (marvelous) forms, O Bharata (scion of the Bharata dynasty). Here, it should be understood that 'many' ('bahuni') and 'Adityas' etc., are the elaboration of 'by hundreds and by thousands, of various kinds' (from verse 11.5); 'never seen before' ('adrstapurvani') is the explanation of 'divine' ('divyani'); and 'wonders' ('ascaryani') is the explanation of 'of various colors and shapes'.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He specifies those very forms by the word, 'Behold' etc. Behold the Adityas and others in My body. The Maruts are the forty-nine specific deities. 'Never seen before' means forms not seen previously by you or by anyone else. 'Wonders' means highly marvelous/extraordinary forms.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The twelve Adityas, the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the two Asvins, and the forty-nine Maruts. Likewise, many other forms not seen before in the human world by you or by anyone else. By addressing him as 'Bharata', He suggests: 'Because of your birth in an illustrious dynasty, you have the eligibility to behold this.' Or, the intention behind this address is to convey: 'This has not been seen by anyone else born in the lineage in which you have taken birth'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Even though there is a context of describing His unique and infinite forms as 'by hundreds and by thousands' (11.5), keeping in view that one single form is going to be specially displayed for the present purpose as stated in 'here, centered in one' (11.7), He says: 'in My single form'. By the words 'Behold the Adityas' etc., the thirty-three principal deities are first indicated; with this in mind, the specific numbers like 'twelve' etc., are mentioned. In accordance with what will be said later, in order to rule out the idea that this is limited only to what is visible, He says: 'for the purpose of illustration' (meaning what is directly perceived in the world and what is described in the scriptures). The implied text is: 'those not comprehended by Arjuna and others'. The phrase 'never seen before' ('adrstapurvani') also implies 'never heard before', or it is a general collection indicating 'unknown'; keeping this in mind He says: 'never seen before in all the worlds and in all the scriptures'. By this, it is indicated that even in respect of a supersensuous object which is generally known through the scriptures, there are many details that can be grasped only through direct perception/realization.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He specifies those very forms by their names, saying, 'Behold' etc. Behold the Adityas who are twelve in nature, the Vasus who are eight in number, the Rudras who are eleven in number, the two Asvins (Asvini-kumaras), and the Maruts who are specific groups of deities; and likewise behold many innumerable forms never seen before by anyone, which are wonders (i.e., extraordinary/transcendental), O Bharat, behold them owing to your worthiness as one born in an illustrious lineage.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
First He states the divine forms: 'Behold the Adityas' etc. 'Wonders never seen before' means marvelous forms such as the four-faced (Brahma), five-faced (Shiva), six-faced (Kartikeya) etc.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O best of the Bhāratas, see here the different manifestations of Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Aśvinī-kumāras and all the other demigods. Behold the many wonderful things which no one has ever seen or heard of before.

 Even though Arjuna was a personal friend of Kṛṣṇa and the most advanced of learned men, it was still not possible for him to know everything about Kṛṣṇa. Here it is stated that humans have neither heard nor known of all these forms and manifestations. Now Kṛṣṇa reveals these wonderful forms.