Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
na jāyate mriyate vā kadācin nāyaṃ bhūtvā bhavitā vā na bhūyaḥ .
ajo nityaḥ śāśvato.ayaṃ purāṇo na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre

Word Meanings:
न - not
जायते - is born
म्रियते - dies
वा - or
कदाचित् - at any time
न - not
अयम् - this
भूत्वा - having been
भविता - will be
वा - or
न - not
भूयः - more
अजः - unborn
नित्यः - eternal
शाश्वतः - changeless
अयम् - this
पुराणः - ancient
न - not
हन्यते - is killed
हन्यमाने - being killed
शरीरे - in body.

Life Application:
Reflect on your birthless and deathless inner presence whenever news of loss or mortality causes fear.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
This Self is never born and never dies at any time, nor, having once come into being, does it again cease to be. This Self is unborn, eternal, everlasting and ancient; it is not slain when the body is slain.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
It is not born, nor does It ever die; after having been, It again ceases not to be; unborn, eternal, changeless and ancient, It is not killed when the body is killed.

न not? जायते is born? म्रियते dies? वा or? कदाचित् at any time? न not? अयम् this (Self)? भूत्वा having been? भविता will be? वा or? न not? भूयः (any) more? अजः unborn? नित्यः eternal? शाश्वतः changeless? अयम् this? पुराणः ancient? न not? हन्यते is killed? हन्यमाने being killed? शरीरे in body.Commentary This Self (Atman) is destitute of the six types of transformation or BhavaVikaras such as birth? existence? growth? transformation? decline and death. As It is indivisible (Akhanda). It does not diminish in size. It neither grows nor does It decline. It is ever the same. Birth and death are for the physical body only. Birth and death cannot touch the immortal? allpervading Self.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
It was not born; It will never die, nor once having been, can It cease to be. Unborn, Eternal, Ever-enduring, yet Most Ancient, the Spirit dies not when the body is dead.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
This verse states that the Self is beyond all the modifications that occur in the body. Birth, existence, growth, change, decay and destruction -- these six kinds of transformation occur in the body, on account of which the jiva has to undergo suffering. For a mortal body, all these causes of sorrow are here denied of the Self -- that is, the Self is utterly free of these modifications.

Unlike the body, the Self is not born, since it is ever-existing. Waves arise and perish, but with them neither the ocean's origination nor its destruction occurs. Only that which has a beginning also has an end. It is only the surging waves that draw their last breath in death. For the ever-existing Self, the question of birth and destruction does not even arise. Hence it is said here that the Self is unborn (aja) and eternal (nitya).

Having denied agency and objecthood of action in the Self, and having then established its unchanging nature through reasoning, the Lord now, summarizing this topic, says --

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
This is neither born; nor ever dies; nor, having not been at one time, will This come to be again.  This is unborn, destructionless,  eternal and ancient and is not slain [even]  when the body is slain.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
It (the self) is never born; It never dies; having come into being once, It never ceases to be. Unborn, eternal, abiding and primeval, It is not slain when the body is slain.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Never is this One born, and never does It die; nor is it that having come to exist, It will again cease to be. This One is birthless, eternal, undecaying, ancient; It is not killed when the body is killed.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
There is scriptural verse-testimony here too, he says: 'na jayate...' Unlike the Lord's own knowledge, this is not 'having come to be, coming to be,' for it is established by scripture and tradition that 'he beheld' (Chandogya Upanishad 6.2.3) refers to that which, distinct from place, time, state and its own form, is of unimpaired consciousness. Why? Because it shares the nature marked by unbornness and the rest, the same as the Lord's own. 'Shashvatah' means ever the same. 'Puranah' means that which makes the body old (jirna) -- hence 'ancient.' Yet, even when the body is slain, this is not slain.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
To establish this very point, he brings down the second mantra, 'na jayate mriyate va vipashchit...,' in 'katham...' Clarifying the reason by showing the Self's freedom from all modification, he cites the very mantra, in 'na jayate...' He establishes the denial of the two modifications, birth and death, in 'na ayam...' The construction is: this Self, having been, will not cease to be; nor, not having been, will it come to be. Not merely these two modifications alone are denied here, but the entire class of modifications, he says, in 'ajah...'

In the Self there is no death, owing to the absence of 'having been, ceasing to be again' -- this is the sense. Even regarding the Self's absence of birth, the very same reason is intended here, he says, in 'va shabdat...' In the absence of birth, the prior modification of coming-into-existence too does not belong to the Self, he says, in 'yasmat...' In the absence of the Self's death through the departure of the vital breath...

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
This embodied one is never born and never dies, nor, having come into being, will it cease to be again. It is birthless, ever-abiding, everlasting and ancient (beginningless). Even when the body is slain, it is not slain.

Explanation -- [Six modifications occur in the body: coming into being, appearing to exist, changing, growing, diminishing, and perishing. This embodied one is free of all six of these modifications -- this is what the Lord states in this verse.]

'Na jayate mriyate va kadachin' -- unlike the body, which is born, this embodied one is never born, at any time. It has simply always existed. The Lord, describing this embodied one as His own portion, calls it 'sanatana' (eternal): 'a portion of Myself alone, become an eternal individual soul in the world of the living' (15.7). This embodied one never dies either. Only that which is born dies, and the word 'dies' (mriyate) applies only where the separation of the vital body from the life-breath occurs. Such separation occurs in the body. But in the embodied one, neither union nor separation occurs at all. It simply remains exactly as it is; it never dies.

Among all the modifications, birth and death are the two principal ones -- hence the Lord denies each of them twice: what was first called 'na jayate' is called again 'ajah,' and what was first called 'na mriyate' is called again 'na hanyate hanyamane sharire.'

'Ayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyah' -- this indestructible, eternal principle, having come into being, will not come into being again -- that is, it is self-established and unchanging. When a child is born, its existence begins only after birth; until it enters the womb, no one says that 'the child is.' The sense is that the child's existence begins after birth, since that conditioned existence has both a beginning and an end. But the existence of this eternal principle is self-established and unchanging, since this unmodified existence has neither beginning nor end.

'Ajah' -- this embodied one is never born; hence it is called 'aja,' that is, birthless.

'Nityah' -- this embodied one endures eternally and continuously; hence it never undergoes decay. Decay belongs only to what is impermanent, what does not endure continuously. Just as, past the midpoint of life, the body begins to diminish, strength begins to fail, and the power of the senses begins to weaken -- thus the body, senses, and inner faculty do undergo decay, but the embodied one does not decay. This eternal principle remains continuously uniform, unvarying. There is no change of state in it; that is, it never changes. It has no capacity for change at all.

'Puranah' -- this indestructible principle is 'purana' (ancient), that is, beginningless. It is so ancient that it was never born at all. Even among things that come into being, it is observed that whatever becomes old no longer grows, but instead perishes; but this is an unborn principle -- how then could the modification of growth apply to it? The sense is that the modification of growth belongs only to things that come into being, not to this eternal principle.

'Na hanyate hanyamane sharire' -- even when the body is destroyed, this indestructible embodied one is not destroyed. The word 'sharire' (in the body) here conveys that it is the body that is subject to destruction. These six modifications occur only in this perishable body, not in the embodied one.

In these words, the Lord has described the body and the embodied one with a clarity not found anywhere else in the Gita.

Arjuna was grieving especially over the anticipated deaths of his kinsmen in the war. To remove that grief, the Lord says that even when the body dies, this embodied one does not die -- that is, it does not cease to be. Hence grieving is improper.

Connection -- in the nineteenth verse, the Lord stated that this embodied one neither slays nor dies. The denial of dying has been made in the twentieth verse; now, to deny the slaying, the next verse is spoken.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
As the self is eternal for the reasons mentioned (above), and hence free from modifications, it is said that all the attributes of the insentient (body) like birth, death etc., never touch the self. In this connection, as the statement, 'It is never born, It never dies' is in the present tense, it should be understood that the birth and death which are experienced by all in all bodies, do not touch the self. The statement 'Having come into being once, It never ceases to be' means that this self, having emerged at the beginning of a Kalpa (one aeon of manifestation) will not cease to be at the end of the Kalpa (i.e., will emerge again at the beginning of the next Kalpa unless It is liberated). This is the meaning - that birth at the beginning of a Kalpa in bodies such as those of Brahman and others, and death at the end of a Kalpa as stated in the scriptures, do not touch the self. Hence, the selves in all bodies, are unborn, and therefore eternal. It is abiding, not connected, like matter, with invisible modifications taking place. It is primeval; the meaning is that It existed from time immemorial; It is even new i.e., It is capable of being experienced always as fresh. Therefore, when the body is slain the self is not slain.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
'Na jayate...' This Self, never having been non-existent at any time, will come to be, having only ever been existent. Hence this is not born, nor does this die too. For, having been existent, this will never become non-existent; but this will certainly always remain existent.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
As to how the Self is unmodified, here is a second mantra -- this Self is not born, that is, no modification in the form of origination belongs to the Self, and it does not die either. The word 'va' here is used in the sense of 'and.' By 'it does not die' the final modification, in the form of destruction, is denied. The word 'kadachit' (never) is to be connected with the denial of all modifications -- as in, 'never is it born, never does it die,' and so on.

Since this Self, having come into existence, that is, having undergone the modification of origination, is not one who will cease to be thereafter, it therefore does not die; for, in common usage, that which ceases to exist after coming into being is said to die. From the words 'va' and 'na,' it is also understood that, unlike the body, this Self does not come into being again after having not been; hence it is not born, for that which comes into being after not having been is said to be born. The Self is not so; hence it is not born.

Since this is so, the Self is 'ajah,' unborn; and since it does not die, it is 'nityah,' eternal. Although the denial of the first and last modifications negates all modifications, still the intervening modifications too must be denied by their own respective terms, so that all the unmentioned modifications, such as youth and the rest, may also be negated -- hence he says 'shashvatah' and the rest. By the word 'shashvatah,' the modification of decay is denied -- it does not diminish in its own nature, since it is without parts; and since it is without qualities, no diminishment through the decay of any quality applies to it either. The modification of growth, opposite to decay, is denied by the word 'puranah' (ancient). A thing that grows by the addition of parts is also said to be 'new.' But this Self, being without parts, was equally fresh even in the past. Thus it is 'ancient,' that is, it does not grow. Likewise, 'na hanyate' -- it is not slain, that is, it does not undergo transformation, even when the body is 'slain.' Here the verb 'to slay' must be understood in the sense of transformation, so that repetition is avoided.

In this mantra, the six kinds of material modifications observed in the world are denied of the Self. The sense of the sentence is that the Self is devoid of every kind of modification. Since this is so, 'both of them do not know' -- this is how this mantra connects with the earlier one.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Still, one might object that 'na jayate' is mere repetition; he answers that this is not the Lord's own statement but a mantra cited in confirmation of what was already said, in 'atra...' One might object: is not the individual soul, existing in its own nature, yet 'coming to be' through its connection with the body -- so how can it be said that 'having been, it does not come to be'? He answers otherwise, in 'na cha...' If the soul is not born, then, just as the Lord's own knowledge, though free of increase and decrease, is nonetheless the basis of the usage 'it came to be' through some inconceivable power, so too, one might ask, what occasions the usage of 'birth' with regard to the soul -- and the answer 'no' is given precisely to address this, is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Kathaka scriptures, serving as authority on this very point, show this. By 'na jayate' and the rest, the modifications of origination, existence and destruction, and other modifications too, are denied of the Self. By 'ajah' and the rest, the conclusion is drawn.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The reason this Self is neither the agent nor the object of the act of slaying is its being unmodified -- this is stated by the second mantra. Yaska and the other etymologists have described six modifications of being: coming into existence, existing, growing, transforming, decaying, and perishing. Of these, the first and last are denied by 'na jayate mriyate va.' The word 'va' is used in the sense of 'and,' meaning 'it is neither born nor does it die.'

Why is this Self not born? Because this Self, at no time, having not been, will subsequently come to be. That which comes to be after not having been undergoes the modification called birth. But this Self, having already existed before, is not born; hence it is unborn (aja). Likewise, this Self, having been at some prior time, will not cease to be thereafter. That which, having been, subsequently ceases to be, undergoes the modification called death. But this Self, continuing to exist in the time thereafter too, does not die; hence it is eternal (nitya), that is, incapable of destruction.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The statement 'this is not slain' is here reinforced by showing the Self's freedom from the six modifications of being, in 'na...': 'na jayate' denies birth. 'Na mriyate' denies destruction. The word 'va' is used in the sense of 'and.' Nor does this attain existence by coming into being; rather, it is of itself already real -- thus the second modification, existence-after-birth, is also denied. The reason for this is 'because it is unborn' -- that which is born attains existence after birth, but that which itself is ever-existing does not attain some further existence again -- this is the sense. 'Nityah,' ever the same, denies growth. 'Shashvatah,' ever-abiding, denies decay. 'Puranah' denies transformation -- it was equally new even before, not becoming new by acquiring a different form through transformation.

Thus the six modifications of being -- coming into existence, existing, growing, transforming, decaying, perishing -- as stated by Yaska and the other Vedic authorities, are refuted with regard to the Self. He now summarizes the very point for which these modifications were refuted -- the absence of the destruction under discussion -- with the statement 'na hanyate hanyamane sharire' (it is not slain when the body is slain).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Refuting, with regard to the Self, these six modifications of being -- coming into existence, existing, growing, transforming, decaying, perishing -- as stated by Yaska, he establishes the Self's freedom from all modification, in 'na...' The word 'kadachit' (never) should be connected with all the terms denying modification. This Self is never born, since it does not come to be after not having been; and since it, having been, having undergone the act of origination, will not subsequently cease to be, it therefore never dies either. The word 'va' is used in the sense of 'and.'

Since it is not born, it is unborn (aja); since it does not die, it is eternal (nitya). Some raise the doubt that the Self might be merely a stream of momentary cognitions, since the Vijnanavadins (Buddhist idealists) too accept unbornness and eternality of such a stream -- to this he answers: in the statement 'having been, this will not come to be again,' the repetition of the verb 'to be' shows the continuity of one and the same agent alike throughout. But the Self is not of that (momentary-cognition) nature.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
To the verse 'na jayate,' recited in the Katha Upanishad (1.2.18), qualified merely by the single word 'kadachit' (never) here, an objection of repetition and direct contradiction might be raised; he answers, in 'uktair eva...' This also dispels the doubt that this is a mere assertion without proof. 'Nityatvena aparinamitvat' means that unreality of destruction alone negates every kind of modification whatsoever. Destruction means the attaining of some new state, worthy of a different name, upon abandoning the prior state -- as when a clay vessel's potsherd-state, and its tendency toward that state, is itself its decay, and that very potsherd-state is the origination of that same substance. Growth, transformation and the rest should be understood similarly. This same point will be stated later: 'for one who is born, death is certain' (2.27). Hence, by negating destructibility, birth and the rest are also negated by implication.

'Sarva eva' (all indeed) is stated to avoid redundancy. Here 'eva' carries the sense of 'api' (even) -- not only is there no capacity to be slain, but also no capacity to be born and the like; thus there is no repetition, is the sense. By the word 'deha-dharmah' (attributes of the body), the topic of birth, death and the like, as indicated by the phrase 'when the body is slain,' is stated; the reason given is 'achetana' (insentient) -- that is, birth and the rest are attributes of the body alone, not of the Self, as established by perception and other means of valid knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The possibility of slaying and the like arises only where there is birth and the like -- but that itself does not exist, he says: 'na jayate...' The absence of birth is thus established. 'Na va kadachin mriyate' establishes the denial of death. 'Having been, this will not come to be again' -- here the sense is: in the manifestation created for My play, in whatever form this soul first appeared, it will not appear again in that very form. Hence, whatever purpose I created it for, it should serve for My pleasure alone; otherwise its birth would be pointless. Since the word 'having been' is used, a doubt about birth might arise; hence he says 'ajah' -- that is, this is not born, since it is My own portion. That this is always so, he says, in 'nityah...' And 'shashvatah' -- remaining ever established in Me, of one unchanging nature. And 'puranah' -- ever in the form of a servant devoted to My service, ancient yet ever new -- this is the sense. He states the purpose for which this is said, in 'na hanyate...': this soul, having entered this worldly body, is not slain even when that body is slain -- this is the sense. From this it is understood that this body is created for My own purpose alone. Hence, acting in accordance with the Lord's will, no fault, even one arising from delusion, will attach -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The statement 'this neither slays nor is slain' -- the portion 'is not slain' is here established by the second mantra found in that same context, in 'na jayate...' This Self is never born, that is, it is not newly created; nor does it die, that is, unlike the pot accepted by the logicians, it does not perish altogether. Two reasons are given here in order -- 'ajah,' 'nityah': being unborn, it is not born; being eternal, it does not die -- this is the sense.

One might then suggest that the Self is merely a stream of momentary cognitions, since the Vijnanavadins (Buddhist idealists) too accept unbornness and eternality of such a stream -- to this doubt he answers, in 'bhutva bhavita va na bhuyah': having been, it will not come to be again. This is said with the intent of showing the unity of the stream of one and the same agency, as conveyed by the repetition of the verb 'to be' through the participle 'having been' -- it will simply continue to be, but, having been, having remained, it will not subsequently perish. According to the logicians, cognition spans three moments -- arising, persisting, and ceasing; but according to the Vijnanavadin, the very moment of cessation of the prior cognition is the moment of arising of the next, and that same moment is also its moment of persistence -- thus, owing to this momentariness, there being no interruption in the dual act of becoming among cognitions, it is said 'having been, it will be.' But this Self is not of that nature, since it is 'shashvata,' ever uniform.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
For the soul there is neither birth nor death at any time. He has not come into being, does not come into being, and will not come into being. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.

 Qualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit is one with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body. Sometimes the soul is called the steady, or kūṭa-stha. The body is subject to six kinds of transformations. It takes its birth from the womb of the mother’s body, remains for some time, grows, produces some effects, gradually dwindles, and at last vanishes into oblivion. The soul, however, does not go through such changes. The soul is not born, but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes its birth. The soul does not take birth there, and the soul does not die. Anything which has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth, he therefore has no past, present or future. He is eternal, ever-existing and primeval – that is, there is no trace in history of his coming into being. Under the impression of the body, we seek the history of birth, etc., of the soul. The soul does not at any time become old, as the body does. The so-called old man, therefore, feels himself to be in the same spirit as in his childhood or youth. The changes of the body do not affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate like a tree, nor anything material. The soul has no by-product either. The by-products of the body, namely children, are also different individual souls; and, owing to the body, they appear as children of a particular man. The body develops because of the soul’s presence, but the soul has neither offshoots nor change. Therefore, the soul is free from the six changes of the body. In the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.2.18) we also find a similar passage, which reads: na jāyate mriyate vā vipaścin nāyaṁ kutaścin na babhūva kaścit ajo nityaḥ śāśvato ’yaṁ purāṇo na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-gītā , but here in this verse there is one special word, vipaścit, which means learned or with knowledge. The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness. Therefore, consciousness is the symptom of the soul. Even if one does not find the soul within the heart, where he is situated, one can still understand the presence of the soul simply by the presence of consciousness. Sometimes we do not find the sun in the sky owing to clouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the sun is always there, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon as there is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we can understand that the sun is in the sky. Similarly, since there is some consciousness in all bodies – whether man or animal – we can understand the presence of the soul. This consciousness of the soul is, however, different from the consciousness of the Supreme because the supreme consciousness is all-knowledge – past, present and future. The consciousness of the individual soul is prone to be forgetful. When he is forgetful of his real nature, he obtains education and enlightenment from the superior lessons of Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa is not like the forgetful soul. If so, Kṛṣṇa’s teachings of Bhagavad-gītā would be useless. There are two kinds of souls – namely the minute particle soul ( aṇu-ātmā ) and the Supersoul ( vibhu-ātmā ). This is also confirmed in the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.2.20) in this way: aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān ātmāsya jantor nihito guhāyām tam akratuḥ paśyati vīta-śoko dhātuḥ prasādān mahimānam ātmanaḥ “Both the Supersoul [Paramātmā] and the atomic soul [ jīvātmā ] are situated on the same tree of the body within the same heart of the living being, and only one who has become free from all material desires as well as lamentations can, by the grace of the Supreme, understand the glories of the soul.” Kṛṣṇa is the fountainhead of the Supersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following chapters, and Arjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore he requires to be enlightened by Kṛṣṇa, or by His bona fide representative (the spiritual master).