Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
samaḥ śatrau ca mitre ca tathā mānāpamānayoḥ .
śītoṣṇasukhaduḥkheṣu samaḥ saṅgavivarjitaḥ

Word Meanings:
समः - equal
शत्रौ - to enemy
च - and
मित्रे - in friend
च - and
तथा - so
मानापमानयोः - in honor and dishonor
शीतोष्णसुखदुःखेषु - in cold, heat, pleasure and pain
समः - equal
सङ्गविवर्जितः - free from attachment

Life Application:
Treat friend and foe alike, remain balanced in honor and dishonor, heat and cold, pleasure and pain, free from attachment.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Swami Tejomayananda did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Swami Sivananda did not comment on this sloka

Swami Sivananda did not comment on this sloka

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Shri Purohit Swami did not comment on this sloka

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Swami Chinmayananda did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Dr.S.Sankaranarayan did not comment on this sloka

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Swami Adidevananda did not comment on this sloka

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Swami Gambirananda did not comment on this sloka

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Swami Ramsukhdas did not comment on this sloka

Commentary --  samaḥ śatrau ca mitre ca -- Here the Lord has described the equanimity in the devotee towards persons. Due to having the vision of the Lord everywhere and being free from attachment and aversion, a perfected devotee has no feeling of enemy or friend towards anyone. It is only people who, seeing favorable or unfavorable behavior according to their own nature, attribute friendship or enmity to him. What to say of ordinary people, even cautious seekers can have a feeling of friendship or enmity towards that perfected devotee. But the devotee himself always remains completely equipoised. No feeling of enemy or friend ever arises in his heart. Suppose a dispute regarding the division of wealth arises between two persons who have feelings of enmity and friendship towards the devotee, and they go to the devotee for a decision. Then, while dividing the wealth, the devotee might give slightly more wealth to the person with the enemy-feeling and slightly less wealth to the person with the friend-feeling. Although there appears to be partiality (inequality) in this decision (behavior) of the devotee, yet the person with the enemy-feeling will see equality in this decision, feeling that he has made an unbiased division. Therefore, even though inequality (partiality) appears in this decision of the devotee, in reality, it will be called equality only (since it generates equality). The above words also prove that people behave with enmity or friendship (according to their own feelings) even with a perfected devotee, and consider themselves as his enemy or friend based on his behavior. That is why, instead of calling him free from enemies and friends, he is described here as "equal towards enemy and friend". tathā mānāpamānayoḥ -- Honor and dishonor are actions performed by others, which are directed towards the body. The devotee has neither egoism (I-ness) nor possessiveness (my-ness) in the body which is called his own. Therefore, even if the body is honored or dishonored, no modification (joy or grief) arises in the devotee's mind. He remains established in equanimity constantly. śītoṣṇasukhaduḥkheṣu samaḥ -- In these words, the equanimity of the perfected devotee is stated in two aspects: (1) Equanimity in heat and cold, that is, no modification arising in the mind when the senses contact their respective objects. (2) Equanimity in pleasure and pain, that is, no modification arising in the mind upon the acquisition or non-acquisition of wealth and other objects. The word 'śītoṣṇa' literally means cold and heat. Cold and heat are the objects of the sense of touch. It is not that the devotee remains equal only in the objects of the sense of touch. Rather, he remains equal in the objects of all the senses. Therefore, here the word 'śītoṣṇa' represents the objects of all the senses. When each sense contacts its respective object, the devotee does get the knowledge of those (favorable or unfavorable) objects, but no modifications of joy and grief arise in his mind. He always remains equal. Ordinary men experience pleasure in the acquisition of favorable objects like wealth, and pain in the acquisition of unfavorable objects. But on the acquisition or non-acquisition of those very objects, no modifications of attachment-aversion, joy-grief, etc., ever arise in the mind of the perfected devotee. He remains equal in every situation. Remaining equal in pleasure and pain (sukhaduḥkheṣu samaḥ) and being free from pleasure and pain (sukhaduḥkha-vinirmuktaḥ) are used in the same sense in the Gita. Since situations of pleasure and pain are inevitable, it is not possible to be free from them. Therefore, the devotee remains equal in favorable and unfavorable circumstances. Yes, one can be free from the joy and grief that arise in the mind due to favorable and unfavorable circumstances. From this perspective, wherever in the Gita it is mentioned to be equal in pleasure and pain, it should be understood as being equal in the circumstances of pleasure and pain; and wherever it is mentioned to be free from pleasure and pain, it should be understood as being free from joy and grief (arising from the acquisition of favorable and unfavorable circumstances). saṅgavivarjitaḥ -- The word 'saṅga' means both relationship (association) and attachment. It is not possible for a human being to physically renounce the association or relationship of all objects, because as long as a person is alive, the body, mind, intellect, and senses remain with him. Yes, physical renunciation of some objects other than the body is possible. For instance, if a person has physically renounced the association of living beings and objects, but if even the slightest attachment towards them remains in his mind, then despite being far from those beings and objects, his relationship with them actually remains. On the other hand, if there is not the slightest attachment to living beings and objects in the mind, then even while being near them, there is actually no relationship with them. If liberation were attained only by physically renouncing objects, then everyone who dies would be liberated, because he has renounced even his body. But this is not the case. Even after renouncing the body, if attachment remains in the mind, the bondage of the world continues. Therefore, it is worldly attachment that binds a person, and not the physical relationship with worldly beings and objects. Physically renouncing objects can also be a means to eliminate attachment, but the essential requirement is the complete renunciation of attachment. If there is even the slightest attachment towards the world, its contemplation will definitely occur. For this reason, that attachment can gradually lead the seeker to desire, anger, delusion, etc., and become the cause of his downfall (Gita 2.62-63). In the fifty-ninth verse of the second chapter, the Lord, by using the words 'paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate', has spoken of the complete cessation of attachment after attaining the Lord. The cessation of attachment can occur even before attaining the Lord, but after attaining the Lord, attachment ceases completely. In a great soul who has realized the Lord, there is a complete absence of attachment. But it is not a rule that before realizing the Lord, in the stage of practice, there cannot be a complete absence of attachment. Even in the stage of practice, attachment can completely disappear, and the seeker can immediately realize the Lord (Gita 5.21, 16.22). Attachment resides neither in the pure consciousness (which is a part of the Supreme Soul) nor in the insentient matter (nature). It resides in the identification of "I-ness" (ego) which is the relationship between the sentient and the insentient. That same attachment is perceived in the intellect, mind, senses, and objects. If the attachment residing in the seeker's belief of "I-ness" is eliminated, the attachment perceived elsewhere will automatically disappear. The cause of attachment is lack of discrimination (aviveka). Due to not giving full importance to one's discrimination, attachment remains in the seeker. There is no lack of discrimination in a devotee. Therefore, he is completely free from attachment. By turning away from one's source, the Lord, and by mistake considering the world as one's own, attraction towards the world arises, and due to attraction, attachment to the world occurs. When the assumed sense of mine-ness towards the world is completely eliminated, the intellect becomes equal. On the intellect becoming equal, one automatically becomes free from attachment. An Important Point -- In reality, every living being has a natural affection (love) towards the Lord. As long as the relationship of mine-ness assumed by mistake with the world exists, that affection is not manifested; rather, it appears in the form of attachment to the world. Even when there is attachment to the world, in reality, the affection for the Lord does not perish. As soon as the affection is manifested, attachment is completely removed (just like darkness upon the rising of the sun). As dispassion towards the world arises, affection for the Lord is manifested. It is a rule that after ending attachment, dispassion itself also quietens down in the same manner as fire after burning the wood. In this way, when attachment and dispassion cease to exist, the source of natural, spontaneous affection (love for God) starts flowing. For this, not the slightest effort has to be made. Then the devotee completely surrenders to the Lord. All his actions are performed only for the pleasure of the Lord. Being pleased with him, the Lord bestows His love upon that devotee. The devotee directs that love also back towards the Lord. By this, the Lord becomes further delighted and again bestows love on him. The devotee again directs it towards the Lord. In this way, this play of exchange of ever-increasing love between the devotee and the Lord continues at every moment. tulyanindāstutih -- Censure and praise are mainly of the name. This is also an action performed by others. People censure or praise the devotee according to their own nature. The devotee has not even a trace of egoism (I-ness) or possessiveness (my-ness) in the name and body called his own. Therefore, praise and censure do not have the slightest effect on him. The devotee has neither attraction towards the one who praises him nor aversion towards the one who censures him. He has equal intellect in both. Ordinary men have a desire for their own praise within them, hence they feel pain on hearing their censure and pleasure on hearing their praise. On the contrary, seekers (who do not desire their own praise) become cautious on hearing censure and feel embarrassed on hearing praise. But due to not having the slightest sense of mine-ness in the name, the perfected devotee is free from both these feelings, that is, he is equal in praise and censure. Yes, he too can sometimes behave like a seeker (being cautious in censure and embarrassed in praise) for the sake of guiding the world (lokasaṅgraha). Because of the devotee's vision of the Lord everywhere, he does not differentiate among those who censure or praise him. It is only due to the absence of such differentiation that he appears to be equal in praise and censure. Inauspicious actions cannot be performed by a devotee at all, and in the occurrence of auspicious actions, he considers only the Lord as the cause. Even then, if anyone censures or praises him, no modification is produced in his heart. maunī -- A perfected devotee naturally and spontaneously contemplates on the nature of the Lord, therefore he is called 'mauni' or contemplative. In every wave of thoughts arising in his mind, he sees only 'vāsudevaḥ sarvam' (Gita 7.19) - everything is the Lord. Therefore, contemplation on the Lord is constantly performed by him. Here the word 'maunī' cannot be taken to mean "one who keeps silence of speech", because if we accept this, then those devotees who propagate devotion through speech would not be called devotees. Besides, if becoming a devotee were possible merely by keeping silence of speech, then becoming a devotee would be very easy and such devotees would be innumerable, but the number of devotees is not seen to be large in the world. Moreover, a hypocritical person of demoniac nature can also practice silence of speech obstinately. But here the characteristics of a perfected devotee who has realized the Lord are being described. Therefore, it is logical to accept the meaning of the word 'maunī' as "one who contemplates on the nature of the Lord". santuṣṭo yena kenacit -- To other people, the devotee appears satisfied with whatever is obtained according to destiny for the maintenance of the body (santuṣṭo yena kenacit), but in reality, the cause of the devotee's satisfaction is not any worldly object, circumstance, etc. Having love for the Lord alone, he remains satisfied in the Lord constantly. Because of this satisfaction, he remains equal in every favorable or unfavorable situation of the world, because in his experience, every favorable or unfavorable situation comes only by the benign dispensation of the Lord. Thus, due to being constantly satisfied in every situation, he is called 'santuṣṭo yena kenacit'. aniketaḥ -- It is not that only those who do not have any home (niketa) or dwelling place are 'aniketa'. Whether they are householders or ascetics and monks, all those who do not have possessiveness and attachment to their dwelling place are 'aniketa'. The devotee has not the slightest sense of mine-ness and attachment to the dwelling place and the body (gross, subtle, and causal bodies). Therefore, he is called 'aniketaḥ'. sthiramatiḥ -- There is no doubt or error (contrary knowledge) in the intellect of the devotee regarding the existence and nature of the divine truth. Therefore, his intellect is never deviated from the knowledge of the divine truth under any circumstance. Hence, he is called 'sthiramatiḥ'. To know the divine truth, he never requires any proof, scriptural discussion, study, etc., because he is naturally absorbed in the divine truth. Desires alone are obstacles in having a steady intellect (Gita 2.44). Therefore, having a steady intellect is possible only by the renunciation of desires (Gita 2.55). Having a desire for worldly (contact-born) pleasure in the mind leads to attachment to the world. This attachment does not disappear even on knowing the world to be unreal or false, just as one becomes attached to the scenes (beings and objects) shown in a cinema despite knowing them to be false, or just as one becomes attached to the scenes appearing before the mental vision while remembering past events despite knowing them to be false. Therefore, as long as there is a desire for worldly pleasure within, the attachment to the world does not disappear even on considering the world to be false. The independent existence of the world is strengthened by attachment. On the disappearance of the desire for worldly pleasure, attachment disappears automatically. On the disappearance of attachment, the independent existence of the world ceases, and the intellect becomes fixed in the one divine truth. bhaktimānme priyo naraḥ -- In the word 'bhaktimān', the suffix 'matup' is used in the sense of eternal association with the word 'bhakti'. This implies that devotion (love for God) naturally resides in man. The only mistake man commits is that he leaves the Lord and starts serving (devoting himself to) the world. Therefore, he does not get the juice of the natural devotion to the Lord, and there remains dry insipidity in his life. A perfected devotee is always absorbed in the juice of devotion. Therefore, he is called 'bhaktimān'. Such a devotee is dear to the Lord. The purpose of using the word 'naraḥ' is that he who has made his human life successful (fruitful) by attaining the Lord is alone fit to be called 'nara' (a human being). The person who, having obtained a human body, is only engaged in worldly enjoyment and accumulation, is not fit to be called 'nara'. [In these two verses, the devotee's constant establishment in equanimity is described. A seeker can be said to be established in complete equanimity only when there is equanimity in these five pairs of opposites: enemy-friend, honor-dishonor, cold-heat, pleasure-pain, and praise-censure.] A Special Point Regarding the Context -- Under the first section, in the thirteenth and fourteenth verses, after describing the characteristics of perfected devotees, the Lord said at the end 'yo madbhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ'; under the second section, at the end of the fifteenth verse, He said 'yaḥ sa ca me priyaḥ'; under the third section, at the end of the sixteenth verse, He said 'yo madbhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ'; under the fourth section, at the end of the seventeenth verse, He said 'bhaktimān yaḥ sa me priyaḥ'; and under the final fifth section, at the end of the eighteenth and nineteenth verses, He said 'bhaktimān me priyo naraḥ'. In this way, by giving the words 'me priyaḥ' five times separately, the Lord has divided the characteristics of perfected devotees into five parts. Therefore, the characteristics of perfected devotees told in seven verses should not be understood as coming under a single section. The main reason for this is that if this were a single section, one characteristic would not have been repeated but would have been said only once, and the words 'me priyaḥ' would also have been said only once. Under all the five sections, the absence of attachment-aversion and joy-grief is described in the characteristics of perfected devotees. For example, in the first section, the absence of attachment is shown by the word 'nirmamaḥ', aversion by the word 'adveṣṭā', and joy-grief by 'samaduḥkhasukhaḥ'. In the second section, the absence of attachment-aversion and joy-grief is shown by the words 'harṣāmarṣabhayodvegaiḥ'. In the third section, the absence of attachment is shown by the word 'anapekṣaḥ', aversion by the word 'udāsīnaḥ', and joy-grief by 'gatavyathaḥ'. In the fourth section, the absence of attachment is shown by the words 'na kāṅkṣati', aversion by 'na dveṣṭi', and joy-grief by the words 'na hṛṣyati' and 'na śocati'. In the final fifth section, the absence of attachment is shown by the word 'saṅgavivarjitaḥ', aversion (due to being satisfied only in the Lord) by the word 'santuṣṭaḥ', and joy-grief by the words 'śītoṣṇasukhaduḥkheṣu samaḥ'. If the characteristics of perfected devotees

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Sri Ramanuja did not comment on this sloka

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavgupta did not comment on this sloka

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Shankaracharya did not comment on this sloka

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, who is free from attachment and remains steady in situations of gain or loss.

 A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is praised and sometimes one is defamed; that is the nature of human society. But a devotee is always transcendental to artificial fame and infamy, distress or happiness. He is very patient. He does not speak of anything but the topics about Kṛṣṇa; therefore he is called silent. Silent does not mean that one should not speak; silent means that one should not speak nonsense. One should speak only of essentials, and the most essential speech for the devotee is to speak for the sake of the Supreme Lord. A devotee is happy in all conditions; sometimes he may get very palatable foodstuffs, sometimes not, but he is satisfied. Nor does he care for any residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a tree, and he may sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted to neither. He is called fixed because he is fixed in his determination and knowledge. We may find some repetition in the descriptions of the qualifications of a devotee, but this is just to emphasize the fact that a devotee must acquire all these qualifications. Without good qualifications, one cannot be a pure devotee. Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ: one who is not a devotee has no good qualification. One who wants to be recognized as a devotee should develop the good qualifications. Of course he does not extraneously endeavor to acquire these qualifications, but engagement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and devotional service automatically helps him develop them.