Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
sañjaya uvāca .
evamukto hṛṣīkeśo guḍākeśena bhārata .
senayorubhayormadhye sthāpayitvā rathottamam

Word Meanings:
सञ्जयः उवाच - Sanjaya said
एवम् - thus
उक्तः - addressed
हृषीकेशः - Krishna
गुडाकेशेन - by Arjuna
भारत - O Dhritarashtra
सेनयोः - of armies
उभयोः - both
मध्ये - in middle
स्थापयित्वा - having stationed
रथोत्तमम् - excellent chariot

Life Application:
Seek a neutral mental vantage point from which you can observe emotional storms without being swept away.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Sanjaya said -- O Bharata (Dhritarashtra)! When Arjuna spoke thus, Lord Hrishikesha, having stationed the excellent chariot between the two armies.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Sanjaya said  Thus addressed by Arjuna, Krishna, having stationed that
best of chariots, O Dhritarashtra, in the midst of the two armies.

एवम् thus? उक्तः addressed? हृषीकेशः Hrishikesha? गुडाकेशेन by Gudakesha (the coneror of sleep? Arjuna)? भारत O Bharata (descendant of king Bharata? Dhritarashtra)? सेनयोः of the armies? उभयोः of both? मध्ये in the middle? स्थापयित्वा having stationed? रथोत्तमम् best of chariots.No Commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Sanjaya said: "Having listened to the request of Arjuna, Lord Shri Krishna drew up His bright chariot exactly in the midst between the two armies,

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
No commentary.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Sanjaya said  O descendant of Bharata (Dhrtarastra) !  Thus instructed by Gudakesa (Arjuna), Hrsikesa halted the best chariot at a place in between the two armies,  in front of Bhisma and Drona and of all the rulers of the earth;  and the said:  O son of Prtha! Behold these Kurus,  assembled.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Sanjaya said: Thus addressed by Arjuna, Sri Krsna drew up that best of chariots between the two armies before the view of Bhisma and Drona and all the other kings, O Dhrtarastra, and said, 'O Arjuna, behold these assembled Kauravas.'

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Sanjay said  O scion of the line of Bharata (Dhrtararastra), Hrsikesa, being told so by Gudakesa (Arjuna), placed the excellent chariot between the two armies, in front of Bhisma and Drona as also all the rulers of the earth, and said, 'O Partha (Arjuna), see these assempled people of the Kuru dynasty.'

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Thus prompted by Arjuna, the Lord, seeking to discredit Dhritarashtra's expectation -- that Sanjaya, taking refuge in the dharma of nonviolence, would mostly try to dissuade him from war -- is described replying to the king, in 'Sanjaya said...'. Even the Lord, who had descended precisely to relieve the earth's burden, adopting Arjuna's own stated intent as though it were His own, is shown following Arjuna's words and acting accordingly, in 'Evam...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Sanjaya said -- O king of Bharata's line! When sleep-conquering Arjuna spoke thus, the indwelling Lord Sri Krishna, having stationed the excellent chariot between the two armies, facing Grandsire Bhishma and teacher Drona and facing all the kings, said, 'O Partha, behold these assembled Kurus.'

Explanation: 'Gudakeshena' -- the word 'Gudakesha' has two meanings: (1) 'guda' means curled, and 'kesha' means hair; one whose head-hair is curled, i.e. curly-haired, is named 'Gudakesha.' (2) 'gudaka' means sleep, and 'isha' means master; one who is master over sleep -- who has such control over sleep that he may or may not sleep as he chooses -- is also named 'Gudakesha.' Arjuna's hair was curly, and he had mastery over sleep; hence he is called 'Gudakesha.'

'Evamuktah' -- the Lord listens to the words of a devotee who is not enslaved to the comfort of sleep and laziness, and who is not a slave to sense-objects, but is solely a servant (devotee) of the Lord; not only does He listen, He also carries out that devotee's command. Hence, when His friend and devotee Arjuna gave the order, the indwelling Lord Sri Krishna stationed Arjuna's chariot between the two armies.

'Hrishikeshah' -- the senses are called 'hrishika'; one who is the lord, i.e., master, of the senses is called Hrishikesha. The use of 'Hrishikesha' earlier in verse 21 and here again conveys: He who impels the mind, intellect, senses and all else, who commands everyone -- that very indwelling Lord has here become the one carrying out Arjuna's command! What immense grace this shows toward Arjuna!

'Senayorubhayormadhye sthapayitva rathottamam' -- in the open space between the two armies, the Lord stationed Arjuna's excellent chariot.

'Bhishmadronapramukhatah sarvesham cha mahikshitam' -- the Lord, with singular cleverness, stationed that chariot at such a spot from which Arjuna could see before him Grandsire Bhishma (related by family), teacher Drona (related by learning), and the chief kings of the Kaurava army.

'Uvacha partha pashyaitan samavetan kurun iti' -- the word 'Kuru' includes both Dhritarashtra's sons and Pandu's sons, since both belong to the Kuru lineage. Saying 'behold these Kurus gathered for battle' was meant to arouse in Arjuna the feeling: we are all one family after all! Whether of this side or that, good or bad, virtuous or wicked, they are all our own kinsmen. The Lord's intent in saying 'pashyaitan samavetan kurun' (behold these assembled Kurus) was precisely to awaken this dormant familial affection-born delusion within Arjuna, so that, with delusion awakened, Arjuna would become a seeker -- and, using Arjuna as the occasion, the Lord could deliver the great teaching of the Gita for the welfare of future souls in the age of Kali. Otherwise, the Lord could simply have said 'pashyaitan dhartarashtran samagatan' (behold these assembled sons of Dhritarashtra), but that would have stirred Arjuna's fighting spirit, and then no occasion for the Gita's revelation would have arisen -- nor would Arjuna's dormant familial delusion, which the Lord considered His own responsibility to remove, have been dispelled. Just as when a boil forms, physicians first try to bring it to a head, and only then lance and cleanse it, so too the Lord first awakens the delusion hidden within a devotee, and then removes it. Here too, the Lord awakens Arjuna's hidden delusion by saying 'kurun pashya' (behold the Kurus), which He will later remove through His teaching.

Arjuna had said 'let me look upon them' -- 'nirikshe' (1.22), 'avekshe' (1.23); so there was no need at all for the Lord to say 'pashya' (you look). The Lord needed only to station the chariot. But having stationed the chariot, the Lord said 'kurun pashya' precisely to awaken Arjuna's delusion.

There is a great difference between familial affection and love for the Lord. When there is possessive affection within a family, one's attention never turns to the family's faults; the feeling remains 'these are mine.' Similarly, when the Lord holds special affection for a devotee, His attention never turns to that devotee's faults; the feeling remains 'this one is truly Mine.' In familial affection, actions and objects (the body etc.) are primary; in love for the Lord, feeling (bhava) is primary. In familial affection, delusion (moha) is primary; in love for the Lord, intimate belonging (atmiyata) is primary. In familial affection there is darkness; in love for the Lord there is light. In familial affection a person may fall from duty; in love for the Lord, though absorption may cause forgetfulness in performing duty, a devotee never truly falls from duty. In familial affection, the family members are primary; in love for the Lord, the Lord is primary.

Transition: In the previous verse the Lord told Arjuna to behold the Kurus. What happened after that, Sanjaya describes in the following verses.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Arjuna said - Sanjaya said  Thus, directed by him, Sri Krsna did immediately as He had been directed, while Bhisma, Drona and others and all the kings were looking on. Such is the prospect of victory for your men.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavgupta did not comment upon these slokas.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Thus addressed, the Lord Vasudeva, before all -- Bhishma and the rest -- stationed the chariot between the two armies and said: 'O Partha, behold these Kurus assembled.'

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Vaishampayana relates: thus prompted by Arjuna, seeing Dhritarashtra's expectation that the Lord, taking refuge in the dharma of nonviolence, would mostly turn him back from war, Sanjaya, wishing to dispel that expectation, is described replying to Dhritarashtra. 'O Bharata' -- Dhritarashtra -- the address carries the sense: even mindful of the dignity of the Bharata lineage, abandon this enmity toward your kinsmen. Thus addressed by sleep-conquering, ever-vigilant Arjuna, called 'Gudakesha,' the Lord did not become angry at the thought 'this servant of mine is putting even Me to work as charioteer,' nor did He turn him back from battle; rather, He stationed the chariot between the two armies, facing Bhishma and Drona -- facing them foremost, and facing all the kings too. The double naming of Bhishma and Drona separately indicates their supreme importance. Having stationed that excellent chariot -- the divine one given by Agni, made supreme by the Lord's own presence as charioteer -- Hrishikesha, who knows the hidden intent of all, perceiving that grief and delusion were about to overtake Arjuna, spoke to him with gentle humor. By saying 'O Partha' (son of Pritha), He hints that, since Pritha's feminine nature is prone to grief and delusion, Arjuna, being her son, is now about to display that same tendency -- thereby revealing His own Hrishikesha-nature (knower of all inner states). By this reference to the relation -- 'Pritha is my father's sister, and you are her son' -- He also reassures him. The purport of the command to look is: being resolute that I am your charioteer, behold without hesitation all these assembled Kurus eager for battle. I, as charioteer, am exceedingly attentive; you, however, are for the moment merely occupied with being the warrior in the chariot -- so what cause is there for you to fear at merely seeing the enemy army? To instill this courage in Arjuna, the Lord's words extend only up to 'behold' -- otherwise, it would simply say 'He stationed the chariot between the two armies' and no more.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Wishing to know what happened next, Sanjaya said, in 'Evam...': thus addressed by sleep-conquering Arjuna, O Bharata (Dhritarashtra), Hrishikesha stationed the best of chariots between the two armies.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Wishing to know what happened next, Sanjaya said, in 'Evam...' etc. As for the view that Sanjaya spoke thus foreseeing that the Lord, prompted by Arjuna, taking refuge in nonviolence, would mostly turn him back from battle -- that view should be disregarded, since it is inappropriate to attribute such an intention to one who has already heard that battle has indeed occurred. Thus addressed in the aforesaid manner by sleep-conquering Arjuna, Hrishikesha, the Lord Vasudeva, having stationed the excellent, divine chariot between the two armies, facing supreme Bhishma and Drona and facing all the kings, spoke -- the sense of both statements being: 'O Partha, behold these Kurus, Bhishma and the rest, gathered here for battle.' Thus, the greatness of Arjuna, whose command even the Lord Himself accepts, need hardly be described. 'O Bharata' conveys: being born of the Bharata lineage, do not grieve -- some say this address means: mindful even of the dignity of the Bharata lineage, abandon this enmity toward kinsmen. Thus addressed by Gudakesha, conqueror of the sleep of ignorance, Hrishikesha, the controller of all senses, who would manifest grief and delusion in the heart of Arjuna -- who is, in truth, His own very Self -- for the sake of the world's deliverance, having stationed the excellent chariot facing Bhishma, Drona and all the kings, spoke: 'O Partha, for the world's deliverance, accept these two feminine traits, grief and delusion.' How? To this he answers: behold all these assembled Kurus, your own kinsmen; and having seen them, thinking 'these are mine, I shall not kill them,' become despondent -- this purport is conveyed by the words 'Hrishikesha' and the rest. [The commentary continues in the same vein as given for Madhusudana above, with minor variations.]

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Venkatanatha states the intent of this verse: 'in a place suitable for viewing them' -- the phrase 'directed' shows that the grammatical form used for 'station' carries the sense of a command. The wonder conveyed is: He, the ruler of all, became the one to be commanded! Venkatanatha then explains the passage from 'evamuktah' up to 'mahikshitam': the phrase 'immediately, that very instant' conveys that there was no gap between Arjuna's words and the stationing of the chariot. Regarding 'Bhishmadronapramukhatah' -- the word 'pramukha' here is synonymous with 'adi' (etc.), and the suffix attached to it, being universally applicable, is explained as meaning 'of Bhishma, Drona and the rest' in the genitive plural. Likewise, the conjunction 'cha' (and) is explained as having an emphatic sense, hence 'of all of them indeed.' Since a genitive is used in the sense of disregard, the phrase implicitly carries the word 'looking on' -- or alternatively, 'pramukhatah' may simply mean 'in front of.' The same reasoning extends, by inference, to 'mahikshitam' (of the kings), where 'cha' again has a cumulative sense; in the commentary tradition, 'eva' too is explained to the same effect, yielding the sense 'of those looking on.' Regarding the purport of 'uvacha partha': the phrase 'these assembled ones' is meant to display, by showing the whole gathering of those to be conquered, the situation of coming victory -- or alternatively, the situation of victory that is to be effected by Duryodhana's side. In addressing Dhritarashtra, Sanjaya's words carry the sense 'your own men' -- or, taken with reproach, imply 'the victory to be brought about at Duryodhana's hands.' This latter sense is more fitting, since to Arjuna Krishna would simply say 'yours,' while to Dhritarashtra Sanjaya, as elsewhere, uses 'your own men' -- this usage is consistent throughout. Since Dhritarashtra, in his opening question, asked with hidden intent ('what did they do,' 1.1), Sanjaya, with equally veiled intent, thus narrated to him precisely that which foreshadows the rending of the hearts of Dhritarashtra's own people.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Having thus heard Arjuna's words, Sanjaya narrates that the Lord, having stationed the chariot between the two armies, replied to Arjuna, in two verses beginning with 'Evamuktah...'. Thus addressed by sleep-conquering Gudakesha Arjuna, Hrishikesha, having stationed the excellent chariot between the two armies, replied to Arjuna. Being Hrishikesha, the very impeller of that command, He was Himself its true source -- hence there was no dejection in Him at being so commanded.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Having stationed the excellent chariot' and 'said' -- these two are connected as a single construction.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Sañjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, having thus been addressed by Arjuna, Lord Kṛṣṇa drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both parties.

 In this verse Arjuna is referred to as Guḍākeśa. Guḍākā means sleep, and one who conquers sleep is called guḍākeśa. Sleep also means ignorance. So Arjuna conquered both sleep and ignorance because of his friendship with Kṛṣṇa. As a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he could not forget Kṛṣṇa even for a moment, because that is the nature of a devotee. Either in waking or in sleep, a devotee of the Lord can never be free from thinking of Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, qualities and pastimes. Thus a devotee of Kṛṣṇa can conquer both sleep and ignorance simply by thinking of Kṛṣṇa constantly. This is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or samādhi. As Hṛṣīkeśa, or the director of the senses and mind of every living entity, Kṛṣṇa could understand Arjuna’s purpose in placing the chariot in the midst of the armies. Thus He did so, and spoke as follows.