Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
dhyānenātmani paśyanti kecidātmānamātmanā .
anye sāṅkhyena yogena karmayogena cāpare

Word Meanings:
ध्यानेन - by meditation
आत्मनि - in the self
पश्यन्ति - behold
केचित् - some
आत्मानम् - the Self
आत्मना - by the self
अन्ये - others
सांख्येन योगेन - by the Yoga of knowledge (Sankhya)
कर्मयोगेन - by Karma Yoga
च - and
अपरे - others.

Life Application:
Some perceive the Self by meditation, others by knowledge, and others by the yoga of selfless action.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Some men see the Self in the self (heart) by the self (pure intellect) through the practice of meditation; others by Sankhya Yoga and some aspirants by Karma Yoga (see the Self).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Some by meditation behold the Self in the self by the self, others by the Yoga of knowledge, and still others by the Yoga of action.

ध्यानेन by meditation? आत्मनि in the self? पश्यन्ति behold? केचित् some? आत्मानम् the Self? आत्मना by the self? अन्ये others? सांख्येन योगेन by the Yoga of knowledge (by the Sankhya Yoga)? कर्मयोगेन by Karma Yoga? च and? अपरे others.Commentary There are severla paths to reach the knowledge of the Self according to the nature or temperament and capacity of the individual. The first path is the Yoga of meditation taught by Maharshi Patanjali. The Raja Yogins behold the Supreme Self in the self (Buddhi) by the self (purified mind). Meditation is a continous and unbroken flow of thought of the Self like the flow of oil from one vessel to another. Through concentration hearing and the other senses are withdrawn into the mind. The senses are not allowed to run towards their respective sensual objects. They are kept under proper check and control through the process of abstraction. Then the mind itself is made to abide in the Self through constant meditation on the Self. The mind is refined or purified by meditation. The mind that is rendered pure will naturally move towards the Self. It is not attracted by nor is it attached to the sensual objects.Sankhya Yoga is Jnana Yoga. The aspirant does Vichara (analysis? reflection) and separates himself from the three alities of Nature? the three bodies and the five sheaths and identifies himself with the witness (Self). He thinks and feels? I am distinct from the three alities. I am the silent witness. I am unattached. I am nondoer. I am nonenjoyer. I am immortal? eternal? selfexistent? selfluminous? indivisible? unborn and unchanging.The Karma Yogi surrenders his actions and their fruits to the Lord. He has Isvarapana Buddhi (intelligence that offers everything to God). This produces purity of mind which gives rise to knowledge of the Self. Karma Yoga brings about concentration of the mind through the purification of the mind. It leads to Yoga through the purification of the mind and so it is spoken of as Yoga itself.Those who practise Sankhya Yoga are the highest class of spiritual aspirants. Those who practise the Yoga of meditation are aspirants of the middling class. Those who practise Karma Yoga are the lowest class of spiritual aspirants. The aspirants of the middling and lowest class soon become aspirants of the highest class through rigorous Sadhana or spiritual practices. (Cf.V.5VI.46)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Some realise the Supreme by meditating, by its aid, on the Self within, others by pure reason, others by right action.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
To experience the Self in its pure state, free from all limiting adjuncts (Upadhis), is the ultimate goal of spiritual practice, for the achievement of which various methods and options are described here. The reconstruction of a man's personality must begin from where he finds himself at present. No education can be successful without graded lessons.

An appropriate means is necessary for the spiritual development of even a person with a highly impure and agitated mind. Spiritual progress cannot be achieved merely by understanding the principle of perfection at the intellectual level. Real development is possible only when a person's life is in alignment with knowledge. Therefore, to control one's thought-life and give it the right direction through re-education, a seeker needs to practice active sadhana filled with discrimination and enthusiasm. This is why every individual experiences difficulty on this path of self-elevation.

For the development of people of different types and levels, the great sages of ancient times discovered various spiritual paths, the goal of all of which is the same. For the follower of each path, that very path is the most suitable. One path cannot be called superior to others. In a pharmacy, many medicines are kept, each medicine is for a specific disease, and for a patient suffering from that disease, that medicine is the best until health is restored.

The apparent difference in various seekers is due to differences in their mental balance and intellectual capacity. In scriptural language, this is called the impurity of the inner instrument (Antahkarana). All those means by which purification of the mind is achieved are called external means or secondary means. When the mind is purified, meditation is the internal or direct means of self-realization.

'Some realize the Self by meditation' - Regarding meditation, Shankaracharya writes that withdrawing the organs of hearing, etc., from the objects like sound, etc., into the mind, and concentrating the mind on the Self, which is of the nature of Consciousness, is called meditation. In this contemplation, the flow of thoughts regarding the object of meditation remains uninterrupted and continuous like the flow of oil. Naturally, this path is for those superior seekers whose heart and discrimination are equally developed.

To see the Self does not mean seeing form or color with the eyes, otherwise it would contradict the principle of Vedanta. The Self is the seer, not the seen. Therefore, by seeing the Self is meant the experience of one's own true nature. Because that experience is as clear and free from doubt as seeing a gooseberry in one's hand (karatalamalaka), it became customary to say that they see the Self.

'Realize the Self by the Self' - Shankaracharya says in the commentary on this part: they see through the Self in the self, that is, through the inner instrument (mind/intellect) purified by meditation. The Self is clearly experienced only in a pure inner instrument.

One might wonder why the word 'Self' (Atma) has been used here for the intellect and the inner instrument (mind) as well. The reason for this is that when the seeker experiences their ultimate true Self, from the perspective of that Truth, the mind, intellect, etc., have no separate existence. All become the Self. All waves, foam, etc., are nothing but the ocean. The dream-seer, the dream world, and the experience of the dream are indeed only the mind of the waking person. From this perspective, in our spiritual texts, even the outermost aspect of our personality, like the body, is indicated by the word 'Atma'.

The aforementioned path of meditation-yoga is suitable only for superior aspirants endowed with discrimination and dispassion. Therefore, another means is described for mediocre seekers.

Sankhya Yoga - For those seekers who, despite having discrimination, lack dispassion, and whose mind cannot remain steady in meditation, and who identify themselves with the modifications (vrittis) arising in the mind, the practice of Sankhya Yoga is recommended. That path of systematic logical reflection by which we arrive at a definite conclusion which can never be proven otherwise by other proofs or logic, i.e., remains irrefutable, is called Sankhya Yoga.

In the practice of this sadhana, the seeker should keep this knowledge firm that these modifications arising in the mind are the effects of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas qualities and are objects of perception (drisya); I am their witness, distinct from them and eternal. In this way, when the mind's attention is withdrawn from the modifications and fixed on the witness, the other modifications will automatically dissolve, and only the pure awareness of the unconditioned Self will remain.

Karma Yoga - Those men who have an abundance of desires (vasanas) in their inner instrument cannot practice Sankhya Yoga in the form of study, and for them, the question of meditation-yoga does not even arise. For such seekers, Karma Yoga is first taught as a means for the destruction of desires, which has been described in detail in the third chapter of the Gita. Performing actions dedicated to God, abandoning ego and selfishness, leads to the exhaustion of accumulated desires, and new desires do not arise. Thus, when the mind is purified and the desire for self-knowledge is awakened, that person becomes fit for the study of scriptures (Sankhya Yoga). Thereafter, when discrimination and dispassion are strengthened, they reach the highest peak of spiritual practice, the realization of the identity of Brahman and Atman, through meditation-yoga.

In brief, for a person dominated by Sattvaguna, meditation-yoga is suitable. For a person with a predominance of Rajas and a lack of Sattva, Sankhya Yoga is suitable, and for a person who is completely Rajas-dominant, the means of Karma Yoga is suitable.

Then, what is the remedy for a person who is Tamas-dominant, i.e., who lacks the power of reflection? The Lord explains that:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
[However] by means of meditation, certain persons (Yogis) perceive the Self as the Self in the self (the heart etc.); others by the knowledge-Yoga; and others by the action-Yoga.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Some perceive the self within the self (body) by meditation by the self (mind), others by Sankhya Yoga, and still others by Karma Yoga.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Through meditation some realize the Self in (their) intellect with the help of the internal organ; others through Sankhya-yoga, and others through Karma-yoga.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
By 'Sankhya' is meant the knowledge of the nature of the Lord as declared in the Vedas. Even for the performers of action, realization comes through hearing, knowing, and meditating. For the listeners, it comes through knowing and meditating. For the Sankhyas, it comes through meditating. Thus says the Gaupavana Sruti: 'Having performed action, and having heard, known, and meditated upon it, one perceives. The listener also, having thus known and meditated, and the knower also perceives. Otherwise, his realization does not arise by any means.' The word 'others' is used to show the means even for those who are incapable.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
[The Lord] leads even the lowest unqualified persons to enter the path of liberation, by the words 'others, however' (anye tu). He depicts the hearing which is dependent on teachers, by the word 'this' (idam). He explains worship/devotion by the words 'with faith' (sraddhadhanah). He declares the success of the practice of even those who engage in it based on the instruction of others, by the words 'they too' (te api). He distinguishes them from those who are primarily qualified, by the word 'hearing-devoted' (sruti-parayanah). He explains the meaning indicated by the word 'too' (api) in 'they too'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Some men experience the Supreme Self within themselves, by themselves, through the Yoga of meditation; some through the Yoga of Knowledge (Sankhya Yoga), and others through the Yoga of Action (Karma Yoga).

Commentary -- dhyānenātmani paśyanti kecidātmānamātmanā: The meditation on the qualified-with-form (saguṇa-sākāra) or qualityless-formless (nirguṇa-nirākāra) etc., which has been described in verses 27-28 of Chapter 5, verses 10-28 of Chapter 6, and verses 8-14 of Chapter 8—according to one's interest, faith, belief, and capacity, meditating in that manner, many seekers experience the Supreme Self within themselves, by themselves. The disconnection from Nature which happens by knowing Nature (prakṛti) and Spirit (puruṣa) as distinct, that same disconnection also happens through meditation. Meditation does not take place in the dull (mūḍha) state of the mind, nor in the restless (kṣipta) state. Meditation begins in the distracted (vikṣipta) state. When the mind becomes concentrated in the Self, then samādhi occurs. On becoming concentrated, the mind is restrained (niruddha). In this way, in the state in which the mind is restrained, the mind also detaches from the world, body, thoughts, contemplation, etc. At that time, the meditation yogi, experiencing himself in himself by himself, becomes satisfied (Gita 6.19-20).

anye sāṅkhyena yogena: Other seekers, through the Yoga of Knowledge (Sankhya Yoga) mentioned in verses 11-30 of Chapter 2, verses 33-39 of Chapter 4, verses 8-9 and 13-26 of Chapter 5, and verses 4-5 of Chapter 12, experience the Supreme Self within themselves by themselves. Sankhya Yoga is the name of discrimination (viveka). Through that discrimination, the decision of real (sat) and unreal (asat) is made—that the real is eternal, all-pervading, stable in nature, immovable, unmanifest, unthinkable; and the unreal is transient, temporary, mutable, and subject to change. Through such discriminative inquiry, the Sankhya yogi becomes completely detached from Nature and its effects, and experiences the Supreme Self within himself, by himself.

karmayogena cāpare: Other seekers, through the Yoga of Action (Karma Yoga) mentioned in verses 47-53 of Chapter 2, verses 7-19 of Chapter 3, verses 16-32 of Chapter 4, and verses 6-7 of Chapter 5, experience the Supreme Self within themselves by themselves. The disconnection from Nature which happens by knowing Nature and Spirit as distinct, that same disconnection also happens through Karma Yoga. Whatever a Karma yogi does, let him do it only for the welfare of the world. Whatever he performs—sacrifice, charity, penance, pilgrimage, vows, etc.—let him do all of it only for the welfare of living beings, not for himself. By doing so, one's connection with those actions, objects, body, etc. is severed, and the Supreme Self is experienced within oneself, by oneself. A human being has naturally accepted and assumed the body as himself. To remove this assumption, it is very necessary to see the Supreme within oneself, i.e., to believe in the Supreme in place of the body. Seeing the Supreme within oneself is independent of the instruments (senses/mind). Knowledge dependent on instruments occurs due to the connection with Nature. Therefore, a seeker does not abide in the Supreme through any instrument, but abides by himself; the abiding of oneself in the Supreme can never happen through any instrument.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The different type of Yogis are described herein:

(1) Some with perfect Yoga perceive the self (Atmanam) in the body with the mind (Atmana) by meditation. (2) Others with imperfect Yoga see the self, with mind rendered fit for Yoga, by Sankhya Yoga, namely, Jnana Yoga, (3) Still others, (a) unalified to practise Jnana Yoga, and (b alified but preferring an easier method, and (c) also distinguished persons like Janaka - all these perceive the self after being alified for Yoga by Karma Yoga which contains within itself knowledge (Jnana).

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.25–13.26 jointly): Dhyanena etc., Anye etc.  A  knowledge of this sort is the main.  [For this end]  some practise religious meditation of the Self as Self; others [try] by means of the Sankhya  (knowledge) mentioned already  (Ch. V, 5ff),  while still others  [strive] through action.  Still others, bent upon hearing [from the preceptors etc.]  practise the religious meditation as they have heard, even though they do not themselves know, (have) the knowledge of this kind.  They too cross over the death,  i.e., the cycyle of birth and death.  What is conveyed here is this :  The category Bhagavat, if mentally reflected upon by one means or the other, does transport across [the ocean of death circle]. Therefore , let one remain in this fashion by all means.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Dhyanena, through meditation: Meditation means contemplation (on the Self) after withdrawing into the mind with concentration the organs of hearing etc. from the objects like sound etc., and then withdrawing the mind into the indwelling conscious Self. Thus, from the citation of such illustrations as, 'the crane meditates, as it were, 'the earth meditates, as it were; the mountains meditate, as it were' (Ch. 7.6.1), it follows that meditation is a constant and uninterrupted current of thought like a line of pouring oil. Through that meditation, kecit, some yogis; pasyanti, realize; the indwelling conscious atmanam, Self; atmani, in (their) intellect; atmana, with the help of the internal organ that has been purified by meditation.
Anye, others; sankhyena yogena, through Sankhya-yoga: Sankhya means thinking, 'These alities, viz sattva, rajas and tamas, are objects of my perception; I am the Self, distinct from them, a witness of their functions, eternal and different from the alities.' This Sankhya is Yoga. [By Sankhya is meant that knowledge which arises from the foregoing reflection. This knowledge is itself called Yoga (concentration of mind) inasmuch as it is similar to Yoga in leading to the realization of the Self.] Through that they realize the Self with the help of the internal organ. This is how it is to be construed.
And anye, others; karma-yogena, through Karma-yoga-action itself being the Yoga: Action performed with the idea of dedication to God is figuratively called Yoga since it leads to Yoga. (others realize) with the help of that (action), through purification of the mind and rise of Knowledge. [The best among the yogis are competent for meditation (dhyana); the modiocre for reflection (Sankhya); and the lowest for Karma-yoga.]

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
In the verse 'others by Sankhya Yoga', the interpretation that 'Sankhya' refers to the discrimination between Prakriti and Purusha as taught in the Kapila-Tantra is incorrect, since the non-Vedic Kapila-Tantra has no place here, nor can it be the primary means of realizing the Lord. With this in mind, he explains 'Sankhyena' differently as: by knowledge, i.e., indirect knowledge. In the phrase 'by meditation', to remove the misconception that only meditation by itself is the means of realizing the Lord, he says 'for the performers of action, etc.' The word 'realization' is understood to complete the sentence. Since the order of meaning is more important than the order of reading, it is stated in a reverse sequence. To answer 'Why is this so?', he says 'and thus...'. The word 'having meditated' is also connected with the subsequent phrase 'the knower also'. Objection: If everything is combined, there would be only one path, making the terms 'some, others, yet others' inappropriate. In reply, he says 'others...'. The meaning is that the word 'others' is used to show the respective means and knowledge based on the different stages of the seekers, even for those who are directly incapable of practicing the progressively higher means like meditation.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Through two verses, he states the alternative means for such realization, starting with 'dhyanena'. Some realize the Self within themselves (atmani) by themselves (atmana). Others realize the Self through Sankhya, i.e., through the eightfold Yoga, and still others through Karma Yoga performed without desire.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Here, regarding self-realization, these alternative means are described, starting with 'dhyanena'. In this world, there are four classes of people: the superior, the mediocre, the dull, and the very dull. Among them, he states the means of self-knowledge for the superior ones: Through meditation—which is a flow of similar thoughts uninterrupted by dissimilar thoughts, which is the fruit of hearing and reflecting, which is contemplation of the Self, and is expressed by the word 'nididhyasana'—some superior yogis realize (directly perceive) the indwelling conscious Self in the intellect with the help of the inner instrument purified by meditation. He states the means of self-knowledge for the mediocre ones: Others (mediocre ones) realize the Self through Sankhya Yoga—which precedes meditation, consists of hearing and reflecting, is preceded by discrimination between the eternal and the transient, and is the contemplation born of the inquiry into Vedanta texts in the form: 'All these modifications of the three qualities are non-self and false; I am the Self who is their witness, eternal, all-pervading, immutable, real, and free from any connection with the insentient.' Here, 'they see the Self within themselves by themselves' is understood, meaning through the generation of meditation. He states the means of knowledge for the dull ones: And others (dull ones) realize the Self through Karma Yoga—which is performed as an offering to God, without desire for fruits, and consists of Vedic duties appropriate to one's varna and ashrama. Here too, 'they see the Self within themselves by themselves' is understood, meaning through the purification of the mind leading to hearing, reflection, and meditation.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Through two verses starting with 'dhyanena', he states the alternative means for the knowledge of the Self thus distinguished. Some perceive the Self within the body (atmani) with the mind (atmana) by meditation (dhyanena), which is the repetition of the thought of the form of the Self. Others perceive the Self by Sankhya, which is the investigation of the distinction between Prakriti and Purusha; others by the eightfold Yoga; and still others by Karma Yoga. The verb 'perceive' (pasyanti) is to be supplied everywhere. Although there is a gradual combination of these practices like meditation etc. as applicable, they are stated as options keeping in view the differences in the steadfastness (nistha) of different seekers.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having thus clarified and explained the meaning of the terms 'Tat' and 'Tvam', now He explains the alternative means for self-realization according to the qualifications of the seekers, starting with 'dhyanena'. Some yogis, who are superior aspirants, freed from defects like impossibility (asambhavana) through hearing and reflecting done in this birth or in past births, withdrawing the senses from their objects into the mind, and concentrating the mind on the indwelling Self, realize (directly perceive) the indwelling conscious Self in their intellect with the help of their inner instrument purified by meditation, which is meditation—another term for nididhyasana, consisting of a continuous and uninterrupted thought like the flow of oil. However, in the explanation of 'atmani' as 'in the body', the consistency compared to the aforesaid meaning is to be considered. Others, who are mediocre aspirants, devoted to hearing and reflecting, perceive the Self through Sankhya Yoga—which is of the nature of contemplation generated by Vedanta inquiry of the form: 'These qualities Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas with their modifications are non-self and false, and I am the Self who is their witness, changeless, eternal, distinct from the qualities, all-pervading, and of the nature of existence-consciousness-bliss'—through the generation of meditation, within themselves by themselves as said before. Others, who are dull aspirants, perceive the Self through Karma Yoga—action itself being figuratively called Yoga since it leads to Yoga, performed with the attitude of dedication to God—through the purification of the mind leading to hearing, reflection, meditation, and direct realization, within themselves by themselves as said before.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Explaining the aforesaid meaning in two verses, he states the different stages of self-knowledge starting with 'dhyanena'. Since the word 'Atman' is used three times in the locative (atmani), accusative (atmanam), and instrumental (atmana) cases, they refer to different entities. Hence, he explains them appropriately as 'within the body' etc. Since the order is of progressively lower stages, the word 'dhyana' (meditation) here denotes the stage called direct Yoga, which is superior even to Sankhya (Jnana Yoga). The showing of the sequence of stages such as 'imperfect yoga' etc. is for the purpose of removing the doubt that they are independent means for self-realization. In accordance with the earlier statement 'of the Sankhyas by the path of knowledge' (3.3), he explains the meaning of 'sankhyena yogena' as Jnana Yoga. With the intention of referring to the class of people qualified for Karma Yoga mentioned earlier by the word 'others' (apare), he says: those who are unqualified for Jnana Yoga, etc.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
If liberation is achieved only through knowledge, then other means would be of no use. Raising this doubt, he explains the nature of other means in two verses starting with 'dhyanena'. Some wise men, by meditation (contemplation), perceive the Lord in the form of the Self in their own heart with the mind. Others perceive Him similarly through Sankhya, which is the Yoga of discrimination between the eternal and the non-eternal. Others perceive that form through Karma Yoga, which is the Yoga of manifesting Him in actions.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Regarding this kind of self-realization, He states the alternative means according to the differences in qualifications of the seekers, starting with 'dhyanena'. Here, those who desire to know the Self worship the Supreme Lord through desireless action; they are the Karma Yogis. Having developed the desire to know from that itself, they engage in hearing Vedanta. Then, when doubts regarding the means of knowledge are removed, they engage in reflecting upon that meaning to remove doubts regarding the object of knowledge; they are the Sankhyas. Thereafter, after the removal of doubts regarding both the means and object of knowledge, they engage in deep meditation (nididhyasana)—characterized by the flow of similar thoughts while rejecting dissimilar thoughts—to remove the contrary notion of identifying the Self with the non-self like the body. Then, upon the maturity of that meditation, they perceive the Lord, the Self, in the modification of the intellect; they are the meditators. Among them, those who are proficient in Karma and Sankhya perceive the Lord, the Self, in the body with the intellect by meditation. Others, who have not performed actions, perceive through Sankhya Yoga (the Yoga of inquiry) by means of meditation. Others again, who are Sankhyas, perceive through Karma Yoga of the aforesaid nature by means of meditation. Thus, it is a combination of the three means, and not an option.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Some perceive the Supersoul within themselves through meditation, others through the cultivation of knowledge, and still others through working without fruitive desires.

 The Lord informs Arjuna that the conditioned souls can be divided into two classes as far as man’s search for self-realization is concerned. Those who are atheists, agnostics and skeptics are beyond the sense of spiritual understanding. But there are others, who are faithful in their understanding of spiritual life, and they are called introspective devotees, philosophers, and workers who have renounced fruitive results. Those who always try to establish the doctrine of monism are also counted among the atheists and agnostics. In other words, only the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are best situated in spiritual understanding, because they understand that beyond this material nature are the spiritual world and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is expanded as the Paramātmā, the Supersoul in everyone, the all-pervading Godhead. Of course there are those who try to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth by cultivation of knowledge, and they can be counted in the class of the faithful. The Sāṅkhya philosophers analyze this material world into twenty-four elements, and they place the individual soul as the twenty-fifth item. When they are able to understand the nature of the individual soul to be transcendental to the material elements, they are able to understand also that above the individual soul there is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the twenty-sixth element. Thus gradually they also come to the standard of devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Those who work without fruitive results are also perfect in their attitude. They are given a chance to advance to the platform of devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Here it is stated that there are some people who are pure in consciousness and who try to find out the Supersoul by meditation, and when they discover the Supersoul within themselves, they become transcendentally situated. Similarly, there are others who also try to understand the Supreme Soul by cultivation of knowledge, and there are others who cultivate the haṭha-yoga system and who try to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead by childish activities.