Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
indriyāṇi parāṇyāhurindriyebhyaḥ paraṃ manaḥ .
manasastu parā buddhiryo buddheḥ paratastu saḥ

Word Meanings:
इन्द्रियाणि - senses
पराण्याहुरिन्द्रियेभ्यः - are said superior, than senses
परं - superior
मनः - mind
मनसस्तु - than mind however
परा - superior
बुद्धिर्यो - intellect, he who
बुद्धेः - than intellect
परतस्तु - greater however
सः - he

Life Application:
Govern your impulses by bringing your mind under the guidance of higher intellect and silent inner awareness.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The senses are said to be superior to the gross body (Indriyani parani ahuh); superior to the senses is the mind (Indriyebhyah param manah); superior to the mind is the intellect (Manasastu para buddhih); and He who is superior even to the intellect is the Supreme Self (Yah tu buddheh paratah sah).

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya states: Above senses, mind, and intellect, Supreme Lord Vishnu alone abides as the sovereign Ruler and Master.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandagiri states: In ascending order of subtlety and pervasiveness, senses yield to mind, mind to intellect, and intellect to the Supreme Witnessing Atman.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Sri Ramanuja states: Superior to body are senses, to senses mind, to mind intellect, and superior to intellect is the individual Soul—master and illuminator of all.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 3.42–3.43 jointly): "Evam buddheh param buddhva..."—knowing the Self as superior to intellect, steady the mind by spiritual intellect and slay the enemy of desire. Thus ends Chapter 3 entitled Karma-yoga.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Shankaracharya states: "They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He"—delineates the inner psychological hierarchy from senses up to the Witnessing Self (*Atman*).

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha states: Knowledge of the hierarchy of subtlety empowers the seeker to transcend intellect and realize the Self.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya states: Beyond senses, mind, and intellect reigns Purushottama—the Supreme Controller and ultimate refuge of all souls.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati states: The witness of even the intellect is the inner Self, completely untainted by desire and bodily mutations.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
They say that the senses are superior; superior to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; and he who is superior even to the intellect is He.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanapati states: Scriptural analysis establishing the supreme transcendence of Atman as the witness beyond body, senses, mind, and intellect.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha states: The soul, body-limb of Vasudeva situated beyond intellect, is the ultimate Seer of all activities.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states: When a seeker perceives Krishna"s divine form beyond intellect, he attains the state of desirelessness.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelakantha states: The inner Self, witnessing the intellect and illuminating all, transcends all material afflictions.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul] is even higher than the intelligence.