Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
amī ca tvāṃ dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥ sarve sahaivāvanipālasaṅghaiḥ .
bhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūtaputrastathāsau sahāsmadīyairapi yodhamukhyaiḥ

Word Meanings:
अमी - these
च - and
त्वाम् - Thee
धृतराष्ट्रस्य - of Dhritarashtra
पुत्राः - sons
सर्वे - all
सह - with
एव - even
अवनिपालसङ्घैः - hosts of kings
भीष्मः - Bhishma
द्रोणः - Drona
सूतपुत्रः - Karana
तथा - also
असौ - this
सह - with
अस्मदीयैः - with of ours
अपि - also
योधमुख्यैः - warrior chiefs.

Life Application:
Watch all the great warriors and kings rushing irresistibly into the flaming mouths of cosmic time.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
And all these sons of Dhritarashtra, along with the hosts of kings, enter into You; together with Bhishma, Drona and Karna, and also with the principal warriors of our side.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
All the sons of Dhritarashtra, with the hosts of kings of the earth, Bhishma, Drona and Karna, with the chief among our warriors.

अमी these? च and? त्वाम् Thee? धृतराष्ट्रस्य of Dhritarashtra? पुत्राः sons? सर्वे all? सह with? एव even? अवनिपालसङ्घैः hosts of kings? भीष्मः Bhishma? द्रोणः Drona? सूतपुत्रः Karana? तथा also? असौ this? सह with? अस्मदीयैः with (those) of ours? अपि also? योधमुख्यैः (with) warrior chiefs.Commentary Karna? though he was the son of Kunti? the mother of the Pandavas? was brought up by a charioteer and hence came to be regarded as his son.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
All these sons of Dhritarashtra, with the hosts of princes, Bheeshma, Drona and Karna, as well as the other warrior chiefs belonging to our side;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
See commentary under 11.27

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
All these sons of Dhrtarastra  along with the entire hosts of kings, this Bhisma, this Drona and this son of the charioteer (Karna), together with the chief warriors of ours too;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
All these sons of Dhrtarastra together with the hosts of monarchs, Bhisma, Drona and Karna along with the leading warriors of our side,

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And into You (enter) all those sons of Dhrtarastra along with multitudes of the rulers of the earth; (also) Bhisma, Drona and that son of a Suta (Karna), together with even our prominent warriors.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He says, 'I see You who are desirous of showing our victory and the defeat of the others.' In that context, he introduces the verse as the cause, by 'yataḥ' (since/from where). He says that there is defeat not only of Duryodhana and others, but also of Bhishma and others, by 'kiñca' (moreover).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Along with our chief warriors, Bhishma, Drona and that Karna also are entering into You. All those sons of Dhritarashtra, along with the multitudes of kings, are entering with great speed into Your terrible mouths with fierce tusks. Some of them are seen stuck between Your teeth with their heads crushed to powder.

Commentary--'bhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūtaputrastathāsau sahāsmadīyairapi yodhamukhyaiḥ'--The chief warriors on our side, like Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Drupada, etc., are all on the side of righteousness (Dharma) and have come to fight solely considering it their duty. Along with these generals of ours, Grandsire Bhishma, Acharya Drona, and that famous son of a charioteer (Suta-putra) Karna are entering into You.

Here, mentioning the names of Bhishma, Drona, and Karna implies that all three of them had come to the battle to perform their duty (Note p. 591).

'amī ca tvāṃ dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥ sarve sahaivāvanipālasaṅghaiḥ'--All the kings on Duryodhana's side, who wish to do what is pleasing to Duryodhana in battle (Gita 1.23), that is, they are not giving him beneficial advice; along with all those groups of kings, the hundred sons of Dhritarashtra like Duryodhana, Duhshasana, etc., are entering with great speed into Your extremely terrifying mouths containing fierce tusks--'vaktrāṇi te tvaramāṇā viśanti daṃṣṭrākarālāni bhayānakāni'. Whether they enter into the Lord or into His mouths in the Cosmic Form, it is the same divine play (Lila). However, according to their inner feelings, their paths appear distinct. Therefore, whether they enter into the Lord or into His mouths, they are indeed within the Cosmic Form itself.

'kecidvilagnā daśanāntareṣu saṃdṛśyante cūrṇitairuttamāṅgaiḥ'--Just as among foodstuffs, some go directly into the stomach while being chewed, but some get stuck between the teeth and tusks; similarly, among those entering Your mouths, some are going straight inside (into the stomach), but some are seen stuck between Your teeth and tusks with their heads crushed to powder.

Here a doubt arises: the warriors are still standing in front on the battlefield, then how did Arjuna see them entering the mouths of the Cosmic Form? The solution to this is that in the Cosmic Form, the Lord is showing Arjuna what is about to happen in the near future. While showing the Cosmic Form, the Lord had told Arjuna to see whatever else he wished to see in this Cosmic Form of Mine (11.7). There was a doubt in Arjuna's mind: whether we will win in the battle or the Kauravas? (2.6). Therefore, to remove that doubt, the Lord shows Arjuna a vision of the near future, as if telling him that victory in the war will be yours. On being questioned by Arjuna later, the Lord said the same thing (11.32 -- 34).

Connection--Arjuna describes in the next verse the entry of those men, who have come to the war from the perspective of Dharma considering it their duty and who desire the attainment of the Supreme Self, using the illustration of rivers.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
All these sons of Dhrtarastra like Duryodhana and others like Bhisma, Drona, and Suta's son Karna together with the hosts of monarchs on their side and also the leading warriors on our side, are hastening to their destruction; they enter Your fearful mouths with terrible fangs; some, caught between the teeth are seen with their heads crushed to powder.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Ca, and; tvam, into You-this is to be connected with 'rapidly enter' in the next verse; sarve, all; ami, those; putrah, sons-Duryodhana and others; dhrtarastrasya, of Dhrtarastra; saha, along with; avanipala-sanghaih, multitudes of the rulers (pala) of the earth (avani); also Bhisma, Drona, tatha, and; asau, that; suta-putrah, son of a Suta, Karna; saha, together with; api, even; asmadiyaih, our; yodha-mukhyaih, prominent warriors, the ?nders-Dhrstadyumna and others.
Moreover,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'See our victory and the defeat of the enemies, which you always desired to see. Now I see what the Lord commanded: "O Gudakesha, see in My body whatever else you wish to see",' says Arjuna through five verses starting with 'amī ca' (and these). The grammatical connection with the subsequent verse is: 'And these sons of Dhritarashtra, Duryodhana and others, all the hundred brothers except Yuyutsu, are entering You in haste.' The lack of a verb here is a literary merit, as it indicates extreme terror. They are entering You along with the multitudes of earth-protecting kings like Shalya and others. Not only Duryodhana and others are entering, but also Bhishma and Drona, who are considered unconquerable by all, and that son of a Suta (Karna) who is always hostile to me, along with even our own prominent warriors like Dhrishtadyumna and others (as if they were enemies whose end is also near).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Seeing that which the Lord had spoken: 'and whatever else you desire to see (including the future victory and defeat in this battle, see in My body)', Arjuna now says, seeing it, in five verses starting with 'amī ca'. The connection with the subsequent verse is: 'These sons of Dhritarashtra, Duryodhana and others, all of them, along with the earth-protecting kings like Jayadratha and others, are entering Your mouths.' So also are Bhishma, Drona, and that son of a Suta, Karna. Not only they, but also along with those opposing warriors who are our chief warriors, Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, and others.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Arjuna speaks with the intention: 'My fear of defeat has also been removed.' The connection with the subsequent verse is: 'And these sons of Dhritarashtra, Duryodhana and others, are entering You in haste.' All of them, except Yuyutsu, along with the hosts of earth-ruling kings like Jayadratha and others. Moreover, those like Bhishma and others on whom the enemies' hope of victory is pinned, and that son of a Suta, Karna, who is my bitter enemy, are entering along with even our own principal warriors like Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, and others.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
He states the reason for the introduction of the five verses starting with 'amī' and their connection with the previous verse by 'evam' (thus). It is said that His own desire is inevitable. The revelation of the terrifying form is to indicate the removal of the burden of the earth which is His own desire, and thereby the encouragement for war is accomplished. Since Arjuna and others are only instruments, even without their actions, it is possible; implying this, it is said 'to be done by Himself'.

Since the entry of the warriors present on the battlefield into the Lord's mouths was not yet happening in reality, to dispel the doubt of it being a mere magic trick (Indra-jala), he says: 'And that Partha...' (pointing to Arjuna's realization). In the context of witnessing the Lord as the creator of everything, the destruction of a few creatures like Dhritarashtra's sons is not very astonishing; with this intention, he says 'in that very...' (tasminn eva). As will be said later: 'You pervade everything, therefore You are all' (11.40), the Lord Himself, who is the Self of all beings and whose body is the entire universe, who is of true resolve, is the ultimate cause of the dissolution of Dhritarashtra's sons etc. The Lord Himself, devouring through His extra-sensory form, is the primary cause; the arrows of Arjuna etc. are only incidental (like the crow-and-palm-fruit maxim) instruments.

By 'even the future...', the meaning is that ordinary perception is restricted to the present. By 'this', it refers to the specific subjects like Dhritarashtra's sons. Alternatively, it means that even though it is yet to happen, it is spoken of as present because of direct realization.

Because of the separate mention 'our own...', the phrase 'hosts of earth-protectors' refers to the enemy side; to indicate this, it is said 'of their side'. Since the slaying of all of them, like Duryodhana and all his allies, is going to occur in the war, the word 'all' (sarvaiḥ) is used. By using the word 'our own...', the death of those on one's own side is also implied, while the survival of the Pandavas themselves is intended. Due to the adjective 'all' used for the enemies and the term 'chief warriors' used for our side, it is indicated by 'some' (kaiścit) that there is no total destruction of the Pandava side in the battle.

The word 'tvaramāṇa' (hastening/rushing) implies that the swift destruction is due to the urgency of their respective sins. Or, it means that all their efforts like war preparations are indeed for their own destruction.

Because 'terrifying' (bhayānakāni) is mentioned separately, the word 'karāla' (fierce) here refers to having gaps/crookedness, or having projecting teeth, as in 'karālam means projecting-toothed or crooked'. Even though there is no verb in 'And these... into You' (11.21), the connection of the verb by ellipsis (as in 'May fire or wind not [harm] you') is indeed a merit. Or, the word 'viśanti' (enter) which is to be spoken later should be read here too. Or, the sentence completes by changing and applying 'seeing..., the inner self is troubled and finds no resolve', rather than treating the two verses as one sentence; because in the previous verse 'tvā' (You) is used in the accusative case, while in the next 'Your mouths' (vaktrāṇi te, 11.27) is used. The reading intended by the Bhashya is 'All these sons of Dhritarashtra', because it says 'Duryodhana and others, all'. Therefore, it is explained as a single sentence with 'viśanti' (enter). To rule out their entry into the Lord for protection, it is said 'for destruction' (vināśāya) by referring to what is to be spoken later.

By 'there' (tatra), it means among the sons of Dhritarashtra. Or, it means in those mouths. It means some enter for destruction, while some are seen already destroyed.

After the verse 'know this to be the enemy here' (3.37), it has been noted and explained by the followers of Yadavaprakasha that some read five verses here: 'Arjuna said: How does this happen, O Krishna, and how does it grow? What is its nature and what is its conduct? Tell me who am asking...' and so on.

And here also, some read: 'Slain by men of various forms, they enter Your mouth of inconceivable form; both the warriors of Yudhishthira and Dhritarashtra, all cut down by various weapons...' and so on.

These verses beginning with 'divyāni' have also been written by Narayanarya. After 'You are Prajapati and the great-grandsire' (11.39), another verse: 'Of beginningless and incomparable power...' exists or not, God only knows. Since they were not cited by earlier commentators and lack fame in study, they were ignored by the Bhashyakara (Ramanuja). Neither is the number of verses in the Gita-Shastra stated by Vyasa and others. The modern opinions are untrustworthy.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus, having seen the universe situated within the divine form of the Lord, and in order to realize what the Lord had said: 'and whatever else you desire to see' (11.7), Arjuna, standing outside and desiring to see and know the nature of both his own and the enemy's armies, now represents what he sees through five verses starting with 'amī ca' (and these). The word 'ca' means 'and again'. These visible sons of Dhritarashtra, standing outside and devoid of reflection (thoughtless), all of them, along with the hosts of earth-ruling kings like Jayadratha and others, and Bhishma the great warrior, Drona the expert in scriptures, and the son of a Suta (Karna), along with even our own principal warriors like Dhrishtadyumna and others (are entering You).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The phrase 'they enter You' is brought forward from the subsequent verse.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
All the sons of Dhritarashtra, along with their allied kings, and Bhishma, Drona, Karna, and our chief soldiers also, are rushing into Your fearful mouths. And some I see trapped with heads smashed between Your teeth.

 In a previous verse the Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would be very interested in seeing. Now Arjuna sees that the leaders of the opposite party (Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa and all the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra) and their soldiers and Arjuna’s own soldiers are all being annihilated. This is an indication that after the death of nearly all the persons assembled at Kurukṣetra, Arjuna will emerge victorious. It is also mentioned here that Bhīṣma, who is supposed to be unconquerable, will also be smashed. So also Karṇa. Not only will the great warriors of the other party like Bhīṣma be smashed, but some of the great warriors of Arjuna’s side also.