Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
rāgī karmaphalaprepsurlubdho hiṃsātmako.aśuciḥ .
harṣaśokānvitaḥ kartā rājasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

Word Meanings:
रागी - passionate
कर्मफलप्रेप्सुः - desirous of the fruit
लुब्धः - greedy
हिंसात्मकः - cruel
अशुचिः - impure
हर्षशोकान्वितः - moved by joy and
कर्ता - agent
राजसः - Rajasic
परिकीर्तितः - is called.

Life Application:
Doer passionate, desiring action fruits, greedy, harmful, impure, subject to joy and sorrow—is Rajasic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The agent who is passionate, desirous of the fruits of action, greedy, cruel by nature, impure, and subject to joy and sorrow, is declared to be Rajasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Passionate, desiring to obtain the reward of actions, greedy, cruel, impure, moved by joy and sorrow, such an agent is said to be Rajasic (passionate).

रागी passionate? कर्मफलप्रेप्सुः desirous of the fruit of action? लुब्धः greedy? हिंसात्मकः cruel? अशुचिः impure? हर्षशोकान्वितः moved by joy and sorrow? कर्ता agent? राजसः Rajasic (passionate)? परिकीर्तितः is called.Commentary A passionate agent is the abode of sins and of greed of the whole world. Wherever he imagines that he may gain worldly fruit he will strive wholeheartedly to obtain it. Whatsoever he gains he keeps strictly to himself and his family. If he attains the fruits of his actions he rejoices. If he fails in his attempt he is overcome by grief.Lubdhah Greedy Thirsting for others property not sharing ones own wealth with deserving persons.Himsatmakah Doing injury to others.Asuchih Impure Having no external and internal purity. (Internal purity is freedom from lust?,anger? greed and pride the heart is filled with compassion? complacency? forgiveness? dispassion? love? etc.)Harshasokanvitah Joy on the attainment of what is desirable? pleasant or agreeable sorrow on the attainment of what is not desirable? pleasant or agreeable? and on having to part with what is desirable. He will be elated with joy when he attains success he will be overcoming by grief when he fails in his undertaking.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
In him who is impulsive, greedy, looking for reward, violent, impure, torn between joy and sorrow,it may be assumed that in him Passion is predominant.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In this verse, a complete description of the Rajasic doer is given, with the adjectives presented in a logical sequence. Thinking sensory objects to be the source of happiness creates attachment (raga). This attachment intensifies into desire for results (karmaphala-prepsu). When desires are fulfilled, instead of satisfaction, it leads to greed (lubdha). Greed is the root of all sins, driving the greedy person to violence (himsatmaka) to protect their gains, without caring for others' pain. Thus, they become impure (asuci) in character, seeking self-interest by any means. Consequently, they are bound to be torn between excessive joy and deep sorrow (harsasokanvitah) upon success or failure. Even normally moral people lose their virtues when overcome by Rajasic desires, and their plans become malicious and harmful.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The agent, who is a man of passion; who craves for the fruit of his action, and is avaricious; who is injurious by nature, is impure and is overpowered by joy and griefthat agent is proclaimed to be of the Rajas (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That doer is called Rajasika who is passionate, who seeks the fruits of his acts, who is greedy, harmful, impure and who is moved by delight and grief.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The agent who has attachment, who is desirous of the results of actions, covetous, cruel by nature, unclean and subject to joy and sorrow is declared to be possessed of rajas.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
A Rajasic agent is identified by attachment to action itself (ragi), thirst for rewards (karmaphala-prepsu), covetousness (lubdha), cruel tendency to hurt others for self-interest (himsatmaka), and lack of external/internal purity.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The agent who is passionate, desirous of the fruit of action, greedy, cruel by nature, impure, and subject to joy and sorrow, is called Rajasic.

Commentary: 'Ragi' refers to mental attraction toward actions, fruits, and objects. 'Karmaphala-prepsu' means every action is done with expectations of rewards (wealth, fame, heaven). 'Lubdha' means never being satisfied and always hoarding more. 'Himsatmakah' means cruel; they do not care if their actions cause suffering to others. 'Asucih' means impure; their attachment defiles their environment, clothing, and even their body. 'Harsasokanvitah' means constantly swinging between joy in success and grief in failure.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The 'passionate' doer is one who aspires for fame; 'who seeks the fruits of his acts' is one who longs for the fruits of his acts; the 'greedy' is he who does not spend the wealth reired for the act; the 'harmful' is one, who while acting, hurts others; the 'impure', is one who lacks the purity reired for the act; who is moved by 'delight and grief' in war etc., is one who is elated or depressed by success or failure in victory (or the opposite) - a doer who fulfils these conditions is declared to be Rajasika.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.26–18.29 jointly): Explains the threefold nature of the agent. An agent free from attachment and egoism, endowed with fortitude and enthusiasm, is Sattvika. An agent swayed by passion, craving fruit, greedy and impure, is Rajasa. An agent discordant, vulgar, obstinate, deceitful, and indolent is Tamasa.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Karta, the agent; ragi, who has attachment; karma-phala-prepsuh, who is desirous of the results of actions; lubdhah, covetous, greedy for other's property, and does not part with his own (when) at holy places; himsatmakah, cruel by nature, having a nature that cuases pain to others; asucih, unclean, devoid of internal and external cleanliness; and harsa-soka-anvitah, subject to joy and sorrow, affected by these two, joy and sorrow-joy at the acisition of desired objects, sorrow at getting undesired objects and losing coverted objects; and elation and dejection may occur to that very person from his actions being aided or hindered; one who is subject to those-; parikirtitah, is declared to be; rajasah, possessed of rajas.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The agent who is highly attached, desiring to enjoy the fruits (like kingdom or heaven), greedy, cruel, and prone to joy and sorrow, is Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The agent who is restless due to desires, hanker after results, covets others' wealth, refuses to spend on righteous causes, hurts others to secure self-interest, lacks scriptural purity, and experiences joy or grief at success or failure, is Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The agent who is highly attached to family/objects, seeks rewards, covets others' property, is cruel by nature, lacks scriptural cleanliness, and swings between joy and grief, is Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The agent who has attachment, seeks fruits (like cattle or heaven), covets others' property, refuses to spend on holy acts, hurts others, lacks purity, and suffers from joy and grief, is Rajasic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The agent who seeks fame, longs for Vedic rewards, is stingy in spending wealth required for righteous deeds, hurts others to secure results, lacks required purity, and fluctuates between joy and sorrow, is Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The agent who is attached to worldly relations, seeks fruits of actions, is greedy for rewards beyond capability, hurts others, lacks purity, and undergoes joy and sorrow, is Rajasic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The agent who is subject to desires, covetous of others' wealth, stingy in sacred places, cruel by nature, lacks cleanliness, and is subject to joy and sorrow, is Rajasic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The worker who is attached to work and the fruits of work, desiring to enjoy those fruits, and who is greedy, always envious, impure, and moved by joy and sorrow, is said to be in the mode of passion.

 A person is too much attached to a certain kind of work or to the result because he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth and home, wife and children. Such a person has no desire for higher elevation in life. He is simply concerned with making this world as materially comfortable as possible. He is generally very greedy, and he thinks that anything attained by him is permanent and never to be lost. Such a person is envious of others and prepared to do anything wrong for sense gratification. Therefore such a person is unclean, and he does not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is very happy if his work is successful and very much distressed when his work is not successful. Such is the worker in the mode of passion.