Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
samaṃ paśyanhi sarvatra samavasthitamīśvaram .
na hinastyātmanātmānaṃ tato yāti parāṃ gatim

Word Meanings:
समम् - equally
पश्यन् - seeing
हि - indeed
सर्वत्र - everywhere
समवस्थितम् - equally present
ईश्वरम् - the Lord
न - not
हिनस्ति - destroys
आत्मना - by the self
आत्मानम् - the Self
ततः - then
याति - goes
पराम् - the highest
गतिम् - the goal.

Life Application:
Seeing the same Lord present everywhere equally, he does not injure the Self by the self, reaching the supreme goal.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Indeed, perceiving the Supreme Lord present equally everywhere, that person does not destroy the Self (himself) by the Self (himself); thereby he attains the supreme goal.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Because he who sees the same Lord eally dwelling everywhere does not destroy the Self by the self; he goes to the highest goal.

समम् eally? पश्यन् seeing? हि indeed? सर्वत्र everywhere? समवस्थितम् eally dwelling? ईश्वरम् the Lord? न not? हिनस्ति destroys? आत्मना by the self? आत्मानम् the Self? ततः then? याति goes? पराम् the highest? गतिम् the goal.Commentary This is the vision of a liberated sage. The Supreme Self abides in all forms. There is nothing apart from It.An ignorant man destroyes the Self by identifying himself with the body and the modifications of the mind and by not seeing the one Self in all beings. He has a blurred vision. His mind is very gross. He cannot think of the subtle Self. He is swayed by the force of ignorance. He mistakes the impure body for the pure Self. He has false knowledge. But the sage has knowledge of the Self or true knowledge and so he beholds the one Self in all beings. An ignorant man is the slayer of his Self. He destroys this body and takes another body and so on. But he who beholds the one Self in all beings does not destroy the Self by the self. Therefore he attains the Supreme Goal? i.e.? he attains release from the round of birth and death. Knowledge of the Self leads to liberation or salvation. Knowledge of the Absolute annihilates the ignorance in toto. If the ignorance is destroyed and false knowledge is also destroyed? all evils are simultaneously destroyed.Those who have realised that unity of the Self in all these diverse forms are never caught in the meshes of birth and death. They attain the state of Turiya (the fourth state beyond waking? dreaming and deep sleep) where form and sound do not exist.The self is everybodys friend and also his enemy as well. The idea first expressed in chapter VI? verses 5 and 6 is repeated here. (Cf.XVIII.20)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Beholding the Lord in all things equally, his actions do not mar his spiritual life but lead him to the height of Bliss.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Vedanta does not teach us to escape from the world; rather, it advises us to re-evaluate this visible world. Generally, our vision of looking at the world is colored by our favorite thoughts and feelings. It is clear that in that state, we do not see the world in its true form. Abandoning this vision of ignorance and looking at the world with the vision of knowledge means to see perfection and bliss, divinity and purity in the present-day dull, sad, miserable, and ugly world. This world is indeed the opposite perception of the ultimate truth due to distorted evidences, which continues to torment the perceiver (Jiva). When the Self, having attained Jivahood through identification with the limiting adjuncts (Upadhis), looks, it sees a manifold creation. This world, born of delusion, sometimes appears to it as giggling and dancing, and sometimes as screaming and roaring. By recognizing the ultimate truth in the midst of all these painful changes, all distractions, meaningless goals, and struggles can end, because he sees the Lord as equally situated everywhere. Because of this experience of knowledge, the wise man no longer has any grief or fear. Once the supporting post of the false ghost is recognized, the earlier fear and grief disappear.
He does not destroy himself by himself - Earlier also, Lord Krishna has clearly described how we become our own enemy or friend. When our lower, ego-centric personality or mind is not available to act according to the guidance of our higher, wise intellect, then that mind becomes our enemy. If we lose control over a vehicle, then instead of serving us, it becomes the cause of our destruction. A person who has seen the Supreme Self pervading everywhere, his mind can never cover the glory of the Lord with its evil shadow.
By this he attains the Supreme Goal - Due to self-ignorance and the resulting false knowledge, our pure nature of the Self remains veiled. Because of this ignorance, a person not only does not know his true nature, but accepts the body etc., which are distinct from the Self, as his own nature. Consequently, his behavior is improper and the goal of his life is nothing but more and more sense-gratification. To achieve this goal, he performs such low actions, which are painful and harmful for himself as well as for the society. He cannot see the greatness and glory of God anywhere. But, when he, endowed with the means of discrimination, dispassion, etc., attains self-realization, then false knowledge along with ignorance is completely eliminated, and he attains the supreme goal.
Since differences are seen in the qualities and actions of all living beings, it must be assumed that there are many souls, not one. Refuting this view, the Lord says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Whosoever, perceiving the Lord as abiding in all alike, does not harm the Self by the Self-he attains, on that account, the Supreme Goal.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
For, seeing the ruler (i.e., self) abiding alike in every place, he does not injure the self by the self (mind) and therefore reaches the highest goal.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Since by seeing eally God who is present alike everywhere he does not injure the Self by the Self, therefore he attains the supreme Goal.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He (Shankaracharya) introduces the next verse to answer a doubt, repeating the words 'Sarva...'. The objection is raised that because the Self appears different in each body due to the presence of righteousness (dharma) and unrighteousness (adharma), etc., correct perception is not possible; this is stated by the words 'Tat iti'. By pointing out differences in each body due to its own qualities like pleasure and pain, and its own actions called dharma and adharma, how can there be perception of equality in those distinct selves? Raising this doubt, the author of the commentary resolves it by saying 'Etat iti'. He refutes the meaning of the word 'Prakriti' as merely 'nature' by saying 'Prakriti'. He refutes the view that 'Maya' is a synonym for 'consciousness' by saying 'Triguna...'. He quotes the scriptural authority for the stated power of the Supreme Being being Maya, by saying 'Mayam tu...'. The meaning of the word 'eva' (only) in 'actions are not performed by anyone else' is shown by saying 'na anyena iti'. What is the other that is to be excluded? The Prakriti of the Sankhyas, called Pradhana, is referred to by 'Mahadadi...'. The connection is with the previous statement: 'he who sees the Self, described with the aforementioned characteristics, in all its ways' i.e., with the variety of types like desired and prohibited. The objection that 'he sees' is a tautology is answered by saying 'he sees the absolute truth...'. What is the solution to the objection that if the selves are different in each body, seeing them as equal is improper? He answers by saying 'of the attributeless...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Because beholding the Lord, who is equally situated everywhere, in an equal manner, a man does not destroy the Self by himself; therefore he attains the Supreme Goal.

Commentary -- Beholding equally indeed... does not destroy the Self by the Self -- The person who sees the Supreme Lord, who is equally and fully present in moving and non-moving beings, in sentient and insentient entities, in high and low births, and in all the three worlds, i.e., who experiences his oneness with that Supreme Lord, does not kill himself by himself. He who, by identifying with the body, considers the growth of the body as his growth and the decay of the body as his decay, the illness of the body as his illness and the health of the body as his health, the birth of the body as his birth and the death of the body as his death, and who considers the modifications of the body as his own modifications, kills himself by himself, i.e., drags himself into the cycle of birth and death. But he whose vision is turned away from the body and is directed only towards the all-pervading Ruler of all, the Supreme Lord, does not kill himself anymore, i.e., he does not go into the cycle of birth and death, and does not experience the modifications of the world and body in himself. In reality, no one can ever destroy or bring about the non-existence of oneself (the true nature/soul), nor can one's non-existence ever happen, and no one even wishes for one's own non-existence. In fact, identification with the perishable body is indeed killing oneself, degrading oneself, and taking oneself into birth and death.
Therefore he attains the supreme goal -- He who, by identifying with the body, wandered in high and low births and died again and again, when he experiences his oneness with the Supreme Lord, then he attains the supreme goal, i.e., the eternally attained Supreme Lord.

An Important Point: The Divine Principle (Paramatma-tattva) is in all places, in all times, in all individuals, in all objects, in all events, in all circumstances, and in all actions. It is equally and fully present as it is, in all. If it is difficult to attain It, then what could be easy? Obtain It wherever you want. In reality, the existence ('is-ness') of this world that is seen does not belong to the world. The world does not remain stable even for a single moment. There is only change and change in it. It is only a bundle of change. Just as when a fan rotates rapidly, a wheel is seen, but in reality there is no wheel there, rather the blades of the fan appear in the form of a wheel. Similarly, this world, though not existing, appears as having existence. In reality, only the Supreme Divine Principle exists. Consider, are all the bodies that are seen now present a hundred years ago, and will they remain a hundred years later? They were not there before, nor will they remain in the end, hence they are not there in the middle either. But the Supreme Lord was there before the creation was born, and will remain after the creation merges back; therefore, the Supreme Lord is fully present as He is, even during the time of creation. That which was not there before and will not remain later is not present even now, and that which was there before and will remain later is present even now. Therefore, the existence of the world that is seen is a mistake. The Supreme Divine Principle alone appears as existence. By the reality of that Supreme Divine Principle, this unreal world, due to delusion (ignorance), appears to be real -- 'By whose truth the insentient Maya appears to be real, aided by delusion' (Ramacharitamanas 1.117.4). If there is no delusion, then this world will not be seen; instead, only the Supreme Divine Principle will be seen -- 'Vasudevah sarvam' (Gita 7.19). Because only God was there, only God will remain, from where will another come in the middle? In all the ornaments of gold, there was only gold before, and only gold will remain, so from where will anything other than gold come in the middle? The ornament is only for the sake of naming (with respect to form, shape, use, etc.), but in essence it is only gold. Similarly, the world is only for the sake of naming, in essence it is only God. The success of human life lies only in experiencing that God.
It is not human, but animalistic, to fail to experience the existing (God) and to get entangled in the non-existing (world). This animalistic nature must be abandoned -- 'Abandon this animal-like intellect' (Srimad Bhagavatam 12.5.2). Therefore the Lord says that he who sees the imperishable Supreme Lord in all perishable beings, his vision is correct. But he who sees the perishable and does not see the imperishable, is a slayer of the Self -- 'He who perceives the Self, which is of one nature (imperishable), to be of another nature (perishable), what sin has not been committed by that thief who steals his own Self?' (Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva 42.37). He who, instead of seeing the perishable world, sees the Supreme Divine Principle equally present everywhere, is not a slayer of the Self, i.e., he does not destroy himself by himself, and therefore he attains the supreme goal. But he who, instead of seeing the all-pervading Supreme Divine Principle everywhere, sees the world and body, that slayer of the Self, failing to attain the supreme goal, repeatedly takes birth and dies, and continues to suffer. Therefore, a man should lift himself by his own Self, and not degrade himself (Gita 6.5).
Just as a face is seen in a mirror even though it is not there, and an elephant is seen in a dream even though it is not there, similarly the world is seen even though it does not exist. If the vision is not directed towards the world, the world will not be seen as existing. God alone is appearing as existence -- let the seeker firmly believe this; even if it is not seen now, it will begin to be seen later. For instance, if a seeker is sitting in Vrindavan, he does not have to keep remembering Vrindavan. While sleeping, eating, or performing every action, he does not remember Vrindavan, yet he has no doubt about the fact that 'I am in Vrindavan'. It remains remembered without active remembering. Similarly, even if God is not seen right now, let the seeker firmly accept that in reality only God exists, and the world does not, then later he will begin to experience it. For, how long will a false thing remain, and how long will the truth remain hidden?
Connection -- In the 26th verse of this chapter, the Lord spoke about the union of Kshetra (the field) and Kshetrajna (the knower of the field). There are two ways to get free from this union -- to recognize one's natural relationship with God and to break one's assumed relationship with nature (the body). In the 27th and 28th verses, the way of recognizing the relationship with God was explained. Now, in the next two verses, the way of breaking the relationship with nature is described.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'The ruler' (the self) abides in the bodies of divinities and the rest as their supporter, controller and as their Sesin (principal). He who sees the self free from dissimilar shapes of divinities etc., and as being of the same form of knowledge, he does not injure himself by 'himself', namely, by his mind. Therefore, as a result of seeing the sameness of the nature of the self in every place as a knower, he attains the 'highest goal.' What is to be reached is called 'goal'. He attains the supreme, namely, the self in its pure form. On the contrary, if he should view the self as dissimilar in every place, i.e., identifies It with the bodies, then he 'injure the self, namely, hurls It into the middle of the ocean of Samsara.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Samam etc.  A man of Yoga, who's thought is on what is eal in one and all, does not harm the Self i.e, does not fell the Self down in the ocean of the cycle  [of birth and death], difficult to cross over.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Hi, since; pasyan, by seeing, by realizing; samam, eally; isvaram, God, i.e., (by realizing Him) as described in the immediately preceding verse; who is samavasthitam, present alike; sarvatra, everywhere, in all beings;-what follows from seeing eally?-he na, does not; hinasti, injure; his own atmanam, Self; atmana, by the Self, by his own Self; tatah, therefore, as a result of that non-injuring; yati, he attains; the param, supreme; gatim, Goal, called Liberation.
Objection: Is it not that no creature whatsoever injures himself by himself? Why do you refer to an irrelevant thing by saying, 'He does not injure৷৷.,which is like saying, 'Fire should neither be lit on the earth nor in the sky,' etc.?
Reply: This defect does not arise, because it is logical with reference to an unenlightened person's ignoring the Self. For, all unillumined people ignore the very wellknown Self which is manifest and directly perceptible, and regard the non-Self as the Self. By performing righteous and unrighteous acts they destroy even that self which has been accepted, and adopt another new self. And destroying even that, they take up another. Similarly, destroying even that, they adopt another. In this way they destroy the self that had been accepted successively. Thus, all unillumined persons are destroyers of the Self. But that which is the Self in reality, even that remains as though destroyed for ever by ignorance, because of the absence of any benefit from Its presence. So, all unenlightened persons are, verily, destroyers of the Self.
On the contrary, the other person who has realized the Self as described does not injure in either way [i.e. either through superimposition or through non-super-imposition.] the Self by his own Self. Therefore he attains the supreme Goal, i.e., the result stated above comes to him.
Lest it be doubted that what was said in, 'seeing eally God who is present in all beings, he does not injure the Self by the Self, is improper with regard to the selves which are diverse according to the differences created by the variety in their own alities and actions, the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Seeing equally, he does not destroy the Self by the Self, i.e., he does not perceive the Self as other than what it is, but understands it as it truly is. This is appropriate. For, as per the scriptural authority (Mahabharata 1.74.27): 'He who perceives the Self, which is of one nature, to be of another, what sin has not been committed by that thief who steals his own Self?'. Rather, he protects the Self, transcends the material world (samsara), and goes beyond death, which is the meaning established by the scriptures (Yajur Veda 31.18, Shvetashvatara Upanishad 3.8, 6.15). Therefore, due to seeing the same form everywhere as the knower, he attains the supreme goal, which is of the nature of Sat-Chit-Ananda (Existence-Consciousness-Bliss), which is the divine abode of the Lord, the Aksara (Imperishable).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
To generate interest, he praises this self-realization by its fruit - 'samam pasyan'. 'Samavasthitam' means situated well, without modifications like birth and ending in destruction, thus indicating imperishability. The rest has been explained earlier. Thus, seeing the Self characterized by the aforementioned attributes, realizing 'I am this' from the perspective of the scriptures, he does not destroy the Self by the Self. For, every ignorant person, by means of ignorance, ignores the Self which is the ultimate reality, one, non-doer, non-enjoyer, of the nature of supreme bliss, and even though it is present and shining, treats it as if it does not exist and does not shine, thereby making it appear as if non-existent, and thus destroys it. Further, because of actions (karma), he destroys the old self, which is the aggregate of body and senses accepted as the Self due to ignorance, and accepts a new one, thereby destroying it. Thus, in both ways, every ignorant person is a slayer of the Self, concerning whom is the memory in the words of Shakuntala: 'He who perceives the Self, which is of one nature, to be of another, what sin has not been committed by that thief who steals his own Self?' And the scripture says: 'Sunless indeed are those worlds enveloped in blind darkness; to them after death go those people who are slayers of the Self.' 'Asurya' means belonging to asuras, of the nature of wealth, i.e., objects of enjoyment. 'Slayers of the Self' means those who have the misconception of the Self in the non-Self. Therefore, he who knows the Self subverts the misconception of the Self in the non-Self by realizing the pure Self. Thus, by attaining his true nature, he does not destroy the Self by the Self; hence he attains the supreme goal. That is, due to the absence of the destruction of the Self, he attains liberation characterized by the cessation of ignorance and its effects.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Why is this so? He says: 'samam...'. Because beholding the Supreme Self, which is equally, properly, and with non-deviating nature situated in all living beings, he does not destroy the Self by the Self, i.e., he does not destroy the Self which is of the nature of existence, consciousness, and bliss, by ignoring it through ignorance. And therefore, he attains the supreme goal, which is liberation. But he who does not see in this manner, being a perceiver of the body as the Self, destroys the Self along with the body. As the scripture says: 'Sunless indeed are those worlds enveloped in blind darkness; to them after death go those people who are slayers of the Self'.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
To inspire the listener, he praises the aforementioned correct vision by stating its fruit - 'samam...'. Beholding the Lord, characterized as described, situated equally everywhere. Since by the Self, i.e. by himself, he does not injure the Self, therefore he attains the supreme goal called liberation. That is, he is liberated.
The meaning is: every ignorant person ignores the Self which is extremely well-known and directly perceptible, and accepts the non-Self as the Self. By performing righteous and unrighteous actions, he destroys the Self that has been accepted, and accepts another Self, and destroying that too, accepts another. Thus, destroying successively the accepted Selves, he is called a slayer of the Self. As per the scriptures and smritis: 'Sunless indeed are those worlds...' and 'He who perceives the Self, which is of one nature, to be of another, what sin has not been committed by that thief who steals his own Self?', the ultimate Self remains as though slain by the ignorant through ignorance. Therefore, all unillumined people are said to be slayers of the Self.
On the contrary, the other person who has realized the Self as described does not destroy the Self by the Self in either way. Therefore, he attains the supreme Goal. By this, the objection that 'no creature whatsoever destroys himself by himself, so why is an unobtained destruction prohibited?' is answered.
Due to the word 'Atman' being primary in referring to oneself, and the flavor of the stated meaning being greater, 'by the Self' means 'by the body etc.', or 'by the mind'. Or, because of seeing the oneness of the Self, he does not injure another self just like his own Self, i.e., he becomes compassionate to all; however, this explanation was not presented by the Acharya (Shankara).

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha justifies the above by the verse 'samam pasyan...'. The word 'hi' indicates cause. The proposed equal vision is praised here through its fruit. Looking forward to what will be said later in 'sarvatra avasthito dehe...' (13.33), he explains the intended meaning of 'sarvatra' (everywhere) as 'in the bodies of divinities and the rest'. In accordance with the previous statement 'bharta bhokta mahesvarah...' (13.23), he expresses the special kind of existence obtained by the power of the prefix in 'samavasthitam' as 'as their supporter, controller, etc.'. That is why 'sthitam' was separated and specified. By the word 'isvara' too, the principalship and controllership are established. Here also, the word 'isvara' is to be understood in the restricted sense, as per the previous reasoning. The word 'samam' is used here to deny the inequalities of divinities, etc. caused by identification with the body; with this in mind, he says 'free from the dissimilar shapes of divinities etc.'. Due to the examination of the before and after, such as 'from the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna' (13.27) and 'when he perceives the variety of beings...' (13.31), the removal of inequalities caused by relationship with the body is intended.
The word 'Atman' with the third case ending (instrumental) here refers to the mind due to its being the instrument and by propriety. The word 'Atman' with the second case ending (accusative) refers to the transmigrating self due to the capacity of being the object of injury. Thus, it indicates 'himself by the mind'.
If it is said that the perceiver of equality has no injury, this would only state the non-obstruction of the perceiver of equality, like a performer of actions that are neither ordained nor prohibited, which would be useless. Moreover, even for a perceiver of inequality, the self, being eternal, is not fit to be injured. Therefore, by 'does not injure', some desirable human goal achievable by equal vision is intended; hence he says 'protects'. He defines the protection, in accordance with the context and the rest of the sentence, as 'from Samsara'.
The word 'tatah' (therefore) here does not refer to the meaning of the sentence, because it is inappropriate to state that the removal of the undesirable is the cause of attaining the desirable when the removal of the undesirable is itself the fruit. Therefore, the equal vision, which is the cause of both, is referred to; hence he says 'from that...'. 'Param gatim' (supreme goal) means the special goal to be reached, as the meaning of state alone is not established; hence he gives the appropriate etymology: 'what is reached is called goal'. He specifies this as 'in its pure form'. For, this context is established as concerning the Jiva (individual self), and the term 'paramam gatim' is already used for the Jiva also in verses like 'which is called unmanifest and imperishable, they call it the supreme goal' (8.21).
But the perceiver of inequality in the Self 'injures the Self' - this specific prohibition implies the permission of the rest, as per the maxim, so he says 'if he should view the self as dissimilar...'. Since the eternal nature of the self is indestructible, what is this injury? To this he says 'hurling It into the middle of the ocean of Samsara'.
By this verse also, through the observation of the true forms of Prakriti and Purusha, their cause of transmigration and cause of liberation are shown as their distinction.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He says that by seeing, one becomes liberated - 'samam...'. Beholding the Lord, who is endowed with all powers, present equally in all worldly objects, well-situated for the sake of His divine play (Lila); indeed, by the Self, in the form of His play-Self, he does not destroy the Self, i.e., the unmodified true nature of the Self. This means he does not perceive it otherwise, but knowing its true nature, he surrenders to it. Therefore, he attains the supreme, excellent goal called Vaikuntha. The word 'hi' indicates appropriateness, as surrendering otherwise is prohibited. That is why it is recited (Mahabharata 1.74.27): 'He who perceives the Self, which is of one nature, to be of another, what sin has not been committed by that thief who steals his own Self?'

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He states the fruit of vision - 'samam...'. Beholding the Lord, who is situated in all bodies just as in one's own body, well-situated, with equality; because he is the seer of non-difference in all, he does not destroy the Self, i.e. the Lord, by the Self (identifying with the body etc.), meaning he does not torment It by casting It into the miseries of various births. Rather, from that he attains the supreme goal, which is liberation. Or, because of seeing the oneness of the Self, he does not injure another self just like his own Self. The idea is that he becomes compassionate to all. And therefore, he attains the supreme goal.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who sees the Supersoul equally present everywhere, in every living being, does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the transcendental destination.

 The living entity, by accepting his material existence, has become situated differently than in his spiritual existence. But if one understands that the Supreme is situated in His Paramātmā manifestation everywhere, that is, if one can see the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every living thing, he does not degrade himself by a destructive mentality, and he therefore gradually advances to the spiritual world. The mind is generally addicted to sense gratifying processes; but when the mind turns to the Supersoul, one becomes advanced in spiritual understanding.