Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
daivī sampadvimokṣāya nibandhāyāsurī matā .
mā śucaḥ sampadaṃ daivīmabhijāto.asi pāṇḍava

Word Meanings:
दैवी - divine
सम्पत् - state
विमोक्षाय - for liberation
निबन्धाय - for bondage
आसुरी - demoniac
मता - is deemed
मा - not
शुचः - grieve
सम्पदम् - state
दैवीम् - the divine
अभिजातः - one born for
असि - art
पाण्डव - O Pandava.

Life Application:
Divine virtues lead to liberation while destructive traits cause bondage, so walk the path of virtue confidently.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The divine state is deemed conducive to liberation, and the demoniac to bondage. Grieve not, O Pandava, you are born with divine endowments.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The divine nature is deemed conducive to liberation, and the demoniacal to bondage. Grieve not, O Arjuna, thou art born with divine endowments.

दैवी divine? सम्पत् state? विमोक्षाय for liberation? निबन्धाय for bondage? आसुरी the demoniacal? मता is deemed? मा not? शुचः grieve? सम्पदम् state? दैवीम् the divine? अभिजातः one born for? असि (thou) art? पाण्डव O Pandava.Commentary Sampat Endowment? wealthy state? nature? virtue.Moksha Liberation from the bondage of Samsara? release from the round of birth and death. The,divine nature leads to salvation the demoniacl nature? to bondage.As Arjuna was already griefstricken and dejected? Lord Krishna assures him not to feel alarmed at this description of the Asuric alities which bring grief and delusion? as he was born with Sattvic tendencies? leading towards salvation. Arjuna? on hearing the words of Lord Krishna? might have thought within himself? Do I possess divine nature or demoniacal nature The Lord? in order to remove Arjunas doubt? said? Grieve not? O Arjuna? thou art born with divine alities. Thou art fortunate. Thou mayest attain to the happiness of Selfrealisation.Do not think? O Arjuna? that by engaging yourself in battle and killing people you will become an Asura. Grieve not on this score. You will establish the kingdom of righteousness by fighting this righteous battle.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Godly qualities lead to liberation; godless to bondage. Do not be anxious, Prince! Thou hast the Godly qualities.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The divine nature is deemed conducive to liberation, and the demoniacal to bondage. Grieve not, O Pandava, thou art born with divine endowments.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda points out that after hearing the detailed lists of virtues and vices, a sincere seeker might wonder which category they belong to. Seeking to reassure Arjuna, who is visibly downcast, Lord Krishna tells him not to grieve because he is born with divine qualities. Ethical living is not about rewarding some and punishing others, but it is a scientific method to reclaim our mental energies. Divine attributes lead to freedom (Moksha) from self-created mental limitations, while demoniac tendencies hold the mind in delusion and suffering, preventing spiritual evolution.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The divine wealth is meant for total emancipation  and the demoniac one is meant for complete bondage.  Grieve not, O son of Pandu.  For the divine wealth you are born

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The divine destiny is deemed to lead to liberation, the demoniac to bondage. Grieve not, O Arjuna, you are born to a divine destiny.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The divine nature is the Liberation, the demoniacal is considered to be for inevitable bondage. Do not grieve, O son of Pandu! You are destined to have the divine nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that 'abhijatah' means born destined for a particular destiny.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that Asuri sampat here includes both demoniac and fiendish (rakshasi) natures. Addressing Arjuna as Pandava highlights his noble parentage which ensures his divine nature.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The divine wealth is for liberation and the demoniac is deemed for bondage. Grieve not, O Pandava, you are born with divine qualities, so you should not worry.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that when a seeker turns completely to the Supreme, their connection with the world breaks, and all divine virtues manifest naturally. Demoniac nature leads to bondage because as long as one has attachment to physical enjoyment, even good deeds only result in higher births but not liberation. To assure Arjuna that his grief about committing sin in the battle is actually a sign of his divine nature, the Lord uses three names (Bharata, Partha, Pandava) to boost his confidence.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'The divine destiny,' viz., which is of the nature of submission to My ?ndments aids liberation, viz., leads to release from bondage. The meaning is that it leads to the eventual attainment of Myself. 'The demoniac destiny' viz, which is of the nature of transgression of My ?ndments, is for bondage, i.e., takes one to degradation.

To Arjuna who, on hearing this, became alarmed and anxious about the classfication of his own nature, Sri Krsna said:

'Do not be grief-ridden. Surely, you are born for a divine destiny, O son of Pandu. The purport is that you have a divine destiny, since you are a son of Pandu who was most eminent among the righteous.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
It has been stated  [at the end of the last chapter] that  'by understanding this' etc.  The thing called  'understanding' comes to be  [in  the following] manner :  After the knowledge, born from hearing  [the scriptures etc.],  there arises a thought-process consisting of the logical analysis,  deliberation and  deep meditation that take the form 'This (what is taught in the scriptures etc.)  is like this'.  The above thought-process is of the nature  of investigation, critical examination and judgement.  From this thought-process one gains a good knowledge of a well practised from i.e., a contemplation of that object, free from the humiliation (influence) of different category.  When this is gained, understanding is achieved  Hence, it will be declared :
 'By critically examining in this way fully, act as you please'.  (Ch. XVIII, 63).
 
Here, only the preceptor and the scripture are mainly capable of creating the scriptural knowledge.  But in producing reasoning, deliberation and meditation the main cause is the capacity to examine critically a thing and  it is a special attribute of the pupil and it is an important one.  Therefore, with an idea that this is in Arjuna and with an intention to add a preparatory note to the purposeful statement  'By critically examining this, [act as you please]'; the Bhagavat, the preceptor, says  'Fearlessness etc.'
 
The Ignorance, born of the Tamas (Stand) occupies the devilish side.  This is repelled  (or removed) by the well augmented wisdom that takes hold of the divine part.  This is the nature of things [under estion]  'You  (Arjuna) have taken refuge in the divine part viz., wisdom, born of the Sattva (Strand).  Therefore shirking off the internal Ignorance in the nature of delusion, you should undertake the action, that has the sanction of the scriptures and that is of the nature of eradicating the external foe having the form of ignorance.'  Thus commences the [present] chapter.  Hence -
 Abhayam etc., upto pandava.  These are the identification marks of a person of divine parts.  [Hence] they are clearly identified.  Self-restraint :  subduing the sense organs.  Thought-lessness :  the perfarmance of action without examining the antecedent and the seel; its absence is the absence of thought-lessness.  Vital power :  the act of casting away [all] limitations by taking hold energy in the Self.  [All] this is the divine wealth and this is for your total emancipation, as it destroys craving.  Therefore, don't get sorrow like 'Having killed brothers etc., how can I (Arjuna) enjoy pleasure ?'  [The idea of] the rest  [of passage] is clear.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
That which is daivi, divine; sampad, nature; is vimoksaya, for Liberation from the bondage of the world. The asuri, demoniacal nature; mata, is considered to be; nibandhaya, for inevitable bondage. So also is the fiendish nature.
Now, when such a statement was made, the Lord, noticing Arjuna having this kind of inner cogitation-'Am I endowed with the demoniacal nature, or am I endowed with the divine nature?'-, says: ma, do not; sacah, grieve, O son of Pandu! Asi, you are; abhijatah, destined to have, born with the good fortune of having; daivim, the divine; sampadam, nature; i.e., you are destined for an illustrious future.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that the divine nature leading to liberation is defined as the path of dedication to the Supreme. Those born with divine wealth should never grieve.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the divine state is for Moksha (liberation), and the demoniac is for Samsara (bondage). Arjuna is comforted by being told he is born of the divine nature.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that a seeker who worries about their spiritual eligibility is comforted by this verse. A true devotee has divine qualities naturally.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that divine qualities remove the obstacles of rajas and tamas, paving the way for liberation.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that Pandavas are dear to the Lord, hence they are naturally endowed with divine wealth. Liberation is assured for them.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that by reassuring Arjuna, the Lord also reassures all future seekers that their sincere longing for liberation is proof of their divine inheritance.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the demoniac qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Pāṇḍu, for you are born with the divine qualities.

 Lord Kṛṣṇa encouraged Arjuna by telling him that he was not born with demoniac qualities. His involvement in the fight was not demoniac, because he was considering the pros and cons. He was considering whether respectable persons such as Bhīṣma and Droṇa should be killed or not, so he was not acting under the influence of anger, false prestige or harshness. Therefore he was not of the quality of the demons. For a kṣatriya, a military man, shooting arrows at the enemy is considered transcendental, and refraining from such a duty is demoniac. Therefore there was no cause for Arjuna to lament. Anyone who performs the regulative principles of the different orders of life is transcendentally situated.