Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
avibhaktaṃ ca bhūteṣu vibhaktamiva ca sthitam .
bhūtabhartṛ ca tajjñeyaṃ grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca

Word Meanings:
अविभक्तम् - undivided
च - and
भूतेषु - in beings
विभक्तम् - divided
इव - as if
च - and
स्थितम् - existing
भूतभर्तृ - the supporter of beings
च - and
तत् - That
ज्ञेयम् - to be known
ग्रसिष्णु - devouring
प्रभविष्णु - generating
च - and.

Life Application:
Know the Divine as undivided yet standing as if divided in beings, the sustainer, devourer, and generator of all.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
And It is undivided, yet It exists as if divided in beings. That Knowable Brahman is the sustainer, destroyer and creator of all beings.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
And undivided, yet It exists as if divided in beings; It is to be known as the supporter of being; It devours and It generates.

अविभक्तम् undivided? च and? भूतेषु in beings? विभक्तम् divided? इव as if? च and? स्थितम् existing? भूतभर्तृ the supporter of beings? च and? तत् That ज्ञेयम् to be known? ग्रसिष्णु devouring? प्रभविष्णु generating? च and.Commentary Brahman must be regarded as That which supports? swallows up and also creates all beings? in the three forms of Brahma who creates the world of names anf forms? Vishnu who preserves or sustains? and Rudra who destroys. It is undivided in the various bodies. It is like ether. It is allpervding like space (Akasa). It is indivisible and the One? but It seems to divide Itself in forms and appears as all the separate existing things and beings. It is essentially unbroken. Yet? It is? as it were? divided among all beings.It devours this world during the cosmic dissolution. It generates it at the time of the origin of the next age. It supports all beings during the period of sustenance of this world.Just as fire is hidden in the wood? so also Brahman is hidden in all bodies. Just as the one space appears to be different through the limiting adjuncts (pot? house? etc.) so also the one indivisible Brahman appears to be different through the limiting adjuncts (the body? etc.). (Cf.XVIII.20)An objector says The knowable Brahman? the Knower of the field? is allpervading. It exists everywhere and yet It is not perceived. Therefore It must be of the nature of darkness or Tamas.The answer is No. It cannot be.What? then It is the Light of Lights.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
In all beings undivided, yet living in division, It is the upholder of all, Creator and Destroyer alike;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Even though electricity is present everywhere, it manifests only in a bulb in the form of light. Similarly, the Self, though all-pervading, manifests specially only where there are limiting adjuncts (upadhis). The one all-pervading space appears as pot-space (Ghatakasha) and room-space (Mathakasha) due to the conditioning of the pot and the room. In earlier chapters, it has been described in many places how the Lord, the substratum of the universe, is the creator, sustainer, and destroyer of the universe. Here, the examples of clay, gold, ocean, and the mind of the waking state are worth remembering, which are respectively the causes of the origin, sustenance, and dissolution of the pot, ornaments, waves, and dreams. This is the object to be known (jneyam). In the verses of this section, a descriptive account of that knowable object is given, which was taught to be known as the Self by purifying the intellect through the practice of virtues like humility (amanitva), etc. If the Self-element, despite being all-pervading inside and outside, does not become the object of experience, it would be of the nature of darkness. Lest such a doubt arise, it is said that it is not so, because:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
It remains undistinguished  (common) in the distinguished  [beings],  and appears as if distinguished.  It is to be known as the supporter of beings, and also as  [their] swallower and orginator.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Undivided and yet remaining as if divided among beings, this self is to be known as the supporter of elements. It devours them and causes generation.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And the Knowable, though undivided, appears to be existing as divided in all beings, and It is the sustainer of all beings as also the devourer and originator.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Moreover, He states another reason for the existence of the Knowable, saying 'Moreover' (kiñca). To clarify this other reason, an objection is raised: 'If It exists everywhere [and yet is not perceived, then It must be of the nature of darkness].' To this, He says, 'No, It is not to be considered as darkness' (na). 'Then what is Its form?' He asks: 'What then?' (kiṁ tarhi). The answer to that is: 'It is the Light of lights' (jyotiṣām). Because It is the illuminator of the sun, etc., and of the intellect, etc., the knowable Brahman indeed exists; thus He says: 'jyotiṣām'. He explains the same: 'Ātmā'. He cites two Shruti texts as proof: 'yena' (by whom) etc. He also shows the remainder of the sentence in support of the stated meaning: 'and from Smriti' (smṛteśca). Lest one suspect that the Knowable, though not of the nature of darkness, is touched by darkness, it is said: 'beyond darkness' (tamasah param). He explains the meaning of the second half of the verse: 'of knowledge, etc.' (jñānādeh). Illumination (uttambhanam) means manifestation. 'Jnanam' here refers to the means of knowledge, i.e., humility (amānitvam), etc., in the sense of the instrument. To clear the doubt of repetition in saying 'knowable is accessible by knowledge' (jñāna-gamyam jneyam), he says 'jneyam'. He displays the manifestation of these three in the intellect: 'tad etat'. He aligns experience with this: 'tatraiva'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Though that Supreme Soul Himself is undivided, He exists as if divided among all beings. That Knowable Supreme Soul alone is the creator, the sustainer, and the destroyer of all beings.

Commentary:
'avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu vibhaktamiva ca sthitam' — In this three-fold world, among all the moving and non-moving beings that are seen, heard, and understood, the Supreme Lord Himself, though undivided, appears as if divided. Division is merely an appearance. Just as space appears different as pot-space, room-space, etc., due to the limiting adjuncts of pot, room, etc., but is in essence one, similarly, the Supreme Soul appears different due to the limiting adjuncts of the bodies of different beings, but is in essence one.
In the twenty-seventh verse of this very chapter, through the words 'samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaram', it has been said to see the Supreme Lord situated equally in all beings. Similarly, in the twentieth verse of the eighteenth chapter, while describing Sattvika knowledge through the words 'avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu', seeing the Supreme Lord as undivided is said to be Sattvika knowledge.

'bhūtabhartṛ ca tajjñeyaṁ grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca' — The Supreme Soul, who was spoken of to be known by the word 'viddhi' in the second verse of this chapter, and whose knowable essence was promised to be described in the twelfth verse, is described here in the forms of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. In reality, the conscious principle (the Supreme Soul) is one. That same Supreme Soul, by accepting the predominance of Rajoguna, is the creator of all as Brahma; by accepting the predominance of Sattvaguna, is the sustainer of all as Vishnu; and by accepting the predominance of Tamoguna, is the destroyer of all as Rudra. The meaning is that the one Supreme Lord, due to performing the actions of creation, preservation, and destruction, assumes the names of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. Here it is necessary to understand that even though the Supreme Soul accepts different qualities (gunas) for actions like creation of the universe, He does not come under the control of those qualities. He has complete sovereignty over the qualities.

Connection: In the preceding verse, the Lord described the Knowable essence as the basis; now in the next verse, He describes It as the illuminator.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Though the entity called the self is present everywhere in the bodies of divinities, men etc., It is 'undivided' because of Its form being that of the knower. However, to those who are ignorant, It appears divided, by such forms as those of divinities etc. - 'I am a divinity,' 'man' etc. Though the self can be contemplated by way of co-ordinate predication as one with the body in such significations as, 'I am divinity, I am a man,' It can be known as being different from the body, because of Its being a knower. That is why it has already been pointed out at the beginning:  'He who knows It?  (13.1).

Now Sri Krsna says that It can be known as different also on other grounds - as the 'supporter of elements' etc. Because It supports the earth and other elements combined in the shape of the body, the self can be known as being different from the elements supported. The sense is that It can be known as a separate entity. Likewise, It is that which 'devours', namely, the consumer of physical food etc. Because, It 'devours' the food, It can be known as an entity different from the elements. It causes 'generation' - It is the cause of transformation of consumed food etc., into other forms like blood etc. As eating, generating etc., are not seen in a corpse, it is settled that the body, an aggregate of elements, cannot be the cause of devouring food, generating of species and supporting them.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.13–13.18 jointly): Jneyam etc. upto visthitam.  Beginningless is  the Supreme Brahman :  by means of the attributes  (descriptions) like these, [the Bhagavat] describes the Brahman as being not separate from the Supreme Consciousness  (or action)  expressed in every utterance and  [thus] gracing  [the seeker] to infer his [or Its] own nature.  These attributes however have already been explained.  Hence what is the use of a fruitless repetition ?

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And further, tat, that; jneyam, Knowable; though avibhaktam, undivided, remaining the same in all beings like space; iva sthitam, appears to be existing; as vibhaktam, divided; bhutesu, in all beings, because It is perceived as existing in the bodies themselves. And just as a rope etc. are with regard to a snake etc. That are falsely imagined, similarly that Knowable is bhutabhartr, the sustainer of all beings, sinced It sustains all during the period of their existence; grasisnu, the devourer, at the time of dissolution; and prabhavisnu, the originator, at the time of creation.
Further, it the Knowable is not perceived though existing everywhere, then It is darkness? Not! What then?

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Lest one suspect that it is fragmented (divided), he says 'avibhaktam'. Even in infinite forms, there is no mutual division. It is situated as if divided only for the sake of manifesting that much by His will. In the form of the protector It is 'bhūtabhartṛ', in the form of the destroyer It is 'grasiṣṇu', and in the form of Prajapati It is 'prabhaviṣṇu'. As stated in the Nibandha: 'That Brahman is of infinite forms, undivided yet possessing division. The vision "May I be many, may I be born" was indeed true of Him. By His will alone were created the conscious parts of Brahman (souls). At the beginning of creation, all emerged formless by His will, like sparks from a fire, though inert by the aspect of existence (sat), and as the inner rulers of all by the aspect of bliss (ānanda).'

The meaning of this is: 'May I be many' thus He contemplated multiplicity and high-low states. His contemplation does not deviate from its object. Created by His will alone, they are Brahman-realized parts, not emerged by yogic power; they are parts of dim light, formless, with subtle limitations, and conscious (chiefly of consciousness). All of them were innumerable in the first creation. Then, even though they were of divine form, they emerged with the desire for high-low status, and thus became formless, like sparks of fire. Nature and its attributes exist with the dominance of existence (sat), while the inner rulers (antaryamins) are of the nature of the bliss aspect. Just as there is multiplicity of souls, so also is there of inner rulers, because both enter a single heart in the form of swans. Therefore, here also it is said: 'situated in the heart of all'. Since there is no difference even in the soul, there is no inconsistency anywhere. Thus there is threefold division by parts. There also, the deliberation is: in existence (sat), there is disappearance of the attributes of consciousness and bliss; in consciousness (chit), there is disappearance of bliss, and the indicator of the disappearance of the bliss aspect is 'formless'. The divine form, such as the four-armed blissful form, is called form by the word 'ākara' because bliss alone provides form to the Lord. Thus, there is no difference in essence, but difference only in name, and it is referred to as inert, conscious, and inner ruler.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
To refute those who advocate a multiplicity of selves in each body, he explains the statement 'the one alone exists pervading all' by saying 'avibhaktam'. It is undivided, meaning identical in the form of the cause, and one in all beings, and not different in each body, because it is all-pervading like space. Nevertheless, because it is perceived through identification with the body, it is situated as if divided in each body; meaning, the appearance of division there is due to limiting adjuncts (upadhis) and is non-real, like space.

An objection is raised: 'Let the Knower of the field (Kshetrajna) be one and all-pervading; but Brahman, the cause of the universe, must be different from it.'

To this he says, 'No', by saying 'bhutabhartr' etc. It is the sustainer of beings, meaning it supports all beings during the period of sustenance; and it is the devourer (grasisnu), meaning it devours them at the time of dissolution; and it is the creator (prabhavisnu), meaning it generates them at the time of creation. As a rope is the cause of sustenance, dissolution, and creation of a falsely imagined snake, similarly, Brahman, who is the cause of the sustenance, dissolution, and creation of the universe, is indeed the one Knowable, identical with the Knower of the field in each body, and not different from it.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover, 'avibhaktam' — In all beings, both moving and non-moving, It is undivided, meaning identical in the form of the cause, and exists as if divided, meaning different in the form of effects. Just as foam, etc., born from the ocean, is not different from the ocean, similarly is that previously described form to be known. It is 'bhutabhartr', the supporter and nourisher of beings during the period of sustenance; 'grasisnu', devouring them at the time of dissolution; and 'prabhavisnu', generating them in various forms of effects at the time of creation.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Moreover, He states the existence of the Knowable on this ground as well. It is 'avibhaktam', meaning without division, and one in each body like space, as there is no proof of its division, and if it were divided, it would become non-Self like a pot. And so says the Shruti: 'One alone without a second, there is no multiplicity here. He goes from death to death who sees multiplicity here,' etc. Therefore, the view of the Sankhyas, etc., that the Self is different in each body, is contrary to Shruti and Smriti and is not to be accepted. How then does the perception of difference arise? Anticipating this, He says, it is due to false imagination. 'vibhaktam iva cha sthitam' — It appears as if divided among all beings, meaning it is perceived with false division in the bodies alone, like the one sun or moon reflected in many vessels of water. As the Shruti says: 'The one Self of all beings is situated in every being; It is seen as one and as many, like the moon in water.' Having thus stated the existence of the Knowable as the indwelling Self, He states Its existence as the Supreme Lord. It is 'bhutabhartr', the supporter of beings during the period of sustenance, meaning It supports, holds, and protects all beings. At the time of dissolution, It is 'grasisnu', meaning devouring or withdrawing them; and at the time of creation, It is 'prabhavisnu', meaning generating them. Just as during the existence of a falsely imagined snake, etc., the rope alone supports them, and at the time of contradiction (negation) it devours them, and at the time of appearance it generates them, similarly is the meaning here. Therefore, one should not suspect that duality is real due to the relationship of cause and effect.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In order to explain the term 'avibhaktam' (undivided) in bodies which have distinct forms, and to reiterate the equality previously stated in 'the wise see with an equal eye' (5.18), he says 'devamanushyadi' (in the bodies of divinities, men, etc.). 'avibhaktam' means without division of divinity, etc., by its own nature. 'vibhaktam iva' (as if divided) — by the word 'iva' (as if), he indicates that the division is the object of erroneous perception of the ignorant ('avidusam'). Thus, the pure state of the self is described.

By 'bhutabhartr' etc., to remove the misconception of cosmic agency (of the individual self), and to show that the context is purely about the self being different from the enjoyer, he avoids the repetition of what was previously said by the two passages starting with 'devo'ham' (I am a divinity, etc.). The distinction in terms of 'I-ness, non-I-ness, knower-ness, ignorant-ness' was stated earlier. Here, however, the discrimination is made through the relationship of support and supported, enjoyer and enjoyed, modified and cause of modification.

Here, the word 'bhuta' referring to what is supported by the individual self, signifies only the insentient matter (achit); and even though it conventionally refers to the great elements, yet due to the context of the field (Kshetra), it refers to the elements transformed in that manner (as the body); thus he says 'bhutanam' (of the elements).

And the word 'jneyam' (Knowable), though introduced in 'I shall declare that which is to be known' (13.12), is repeated here to explain a distinct meaning. He states the result of being the supporter and supported as 'arthantaram' (a different entity). 'prabhavabetu' (cause of generation) — since the purpose is to establish difference from the body, this meaning is appropriate; this is the import. 'generation' here is the transformation in the form of semen, embryo, etc. 'by another form' means in the form of chyle, blood, waste, etc.

An objection is raised: 'Devouring (eating), etc., are seen performed only by the body. And devouring is not possible for a partless self without the aggregate of body and organs; how then is it designated as an attribute of the self?'

To this doubt, he strengthens the stated meaning by the negative argument: 'in a dead body' (mrita-sarire). Is the field (body) the cause of devouring and supporting in its capacity as a body, or merely as an aggregate of elements? In the first case, since the status of being a body is relative to the self, the dependence of devouring on the self is established. In the second case, it is inappropriate because devouring is not seen in dead bodies (which are also aggregates of elements). Although certain changes are seen even in a dead body, yet since they are not accompanied by the conscious eating and supporting of the soul, they do not depend on the individual soul. The dependence on Ishvara, however, is universal, so there is no specialty there. Here, those who explain supporting, devouring, etc., as being like the snake on a rope, are refuted by arguments of abandoning the heard and imagining the unheard.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover, 'avibhaktam' — In all beings, moving and non-moving, because He manifests everything as His own form for the sake of His divine play (leela), He is undivided (identical); but for the sake of experiencing relish (rasa), He is made into a second form, hence He is situated as if divided (different). By the word 'iva' (as if), it is indicated that He displays this by His own will. Moreover, that previously described Knowable is 'bhutabhartr', the protector and nourisher of beings. By the term 'bhartr', His playful and enjoying nature is indicated; hence it means He is the protector during the period of sustenance only for the sake of play (relish). At the time of dissolution, which is of the nature of separation (viyoga), He is 'grasisnu', meaning devouring or withdrawing them into Himself. And again at the time of creation, for the sake of giving the relish of His divine play, He is 'prabhavisnu', meaning He manifests in various forms.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He explains this same point with a half-verse: 'avibhaktam cha'. As stated in the Shruti: 'The one Self of all beings is situated in every being; It is seen as one and as many, like the moon in water.' Among all beings which are aggregates of cause and effect, the individual souls are like reflections of the moon in pots of water, and according to the stated logic they are not different from the original object (Brahman). Through that form, the Knowable object, though undivided (without division) in beings, appears to the ignorant eye as if divided (different) and situated as if far away.

If it is so, then does it mean that beings have independent existence like water-pots separate from the moon? Anticipating this, he says 'bhutabhartr cha'. Because It supports all beings as their substratum, they have no separate existence from It, just as the falsely superimposed snake, staff, line of water, etc., have no existence separate from the rope. He states this same point: 'grasisnu prabhavisnu cha'. Just as a rope devours (negates) the snake, etc., in the state of knowledge, and generates them in the state of ignorance, similarly, the known Brahman is 'grasisnu' (devouring) all beings, and the unknown Brahman is 'prabhavisnu' (generating) all beings.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Although the Supersoul appears to be divided among all beings, He is never divided. He is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every living entity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.

 The Lord is situated in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. Does this mean that He has become divided? No. Actually, He is one. The example is given of the sun: The sun, at the meridian, is situated in its place. But if one goes for five thousand miles in all directions and asks, “Where is the sun?” everyone will say that it is shining on his head. In the Vedic literature this example is given to show that although He is undivided, He is situated as if divided. Also it is said in Vedic literature that one Viṣṇu is present everywhere by His omnipotence, just as the sun appears in many places to many persons. And the Supreme Lord, although the maintainer of every living entity, devours everything at the time of annihilation. This was confirmed in the Eleventh Chapter when the Lord said that He had come to devour all the warriors assembled at Kurukṣetra. He also mentioned that in the form of time He devours also. He is the annihilator, the killer of all. When there is creation, He develops all from their original state, and at the time of annihilation He devours them. The Vedic hymns confirm the fact that He is the origin of all living entities and the rest of all. After creation, everything rests in His omnipotence, and after annihilation everything again returns to rest in Him. These are the confirmations of Vedic hymns. Yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante yena jātāni jīvanti yat prayanty abhisaṁ viśanti tad brahma tad vijijñāsasva ( Taittirīya Upaniṣad 3.1).