Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
muktasaṅgo.anahaṃvādī dhṛtyutsāhasamanvitaḥ .
siddhyasiddhyornirvikāraḥ kartā sāttvika ucyate

Word Meanings:
मुक्तसङ्गः - who is free from
अनहंवादी - nonegoistic
धृत्युत्साहसमन्वितः - endowed with firmness and
सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः - in success or failure
निर्विकारः - unaffected
कर्ता - an agent
सात्त्विकः - Sattvic
उच्यते - is called.

Life Application:
Doer free from attachment, non-egoistic, endowed with fortitude/enthusiasm, unchanged in success/failure—is Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
An agent who is free from attachment, non-egoistic, endowed with fortitude and enthusiasm, and unaffected by success or failure, is called Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
An agent who is free from attachment, non-egoistic, endowed with firmness and enthusiasm, and unaffected by success or failure, is called Sattvic (pure).

मुक्तसङ्गः who is free from attachment? अनहंवादी nonegoistic? धृत्युत्साहसमन्वितः endowed with firmness and enthusiasm? सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः in success or failure? निर्विकारः unaffected? कर्ता an agent? सात्त्विकः Sattvic (pure)? उच्यते is called.Commentary A pure agent does his actions with his whole heart without feeling proud at the performance. He looks for the proper time and place and in accordance with the behests of the scriptures determines whether such actions are worth doing or not. He develops courage and a powerful will. He never seeks physical comforts. He is ite prepared to sacrifice his life for a noble cause. He is neither elated by success nor grieved by failure. He always keeps a balanced mind when he does any action. O Arjuna? that man is a pure agent who? while working? exhibits such alities.Siddhi Success attainment of the fruit of action performed.Nirvikarah Unaffected as having been urged to act merely by the authority of the scriptures? not by a desire for the sake of the reward.Now I will tell thee? O Arjuna? of the characteristics of a passionate agent.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
But when a man has no sentiment and no personal vanity, when he possesses courage and confidence, cares not whether he succeeds or fails, then his action arises from Purity.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The doer is the third aspect of action. Since the three gunas affect our mental and intellectual lives, our sense of doership also changes. A Sattvic doer has two main qualities: 'muktasanga' (free from attachment to results, objects, or people) and 'anahamvadi' (free from the vanity of saying 'I did it'). They realize that success is never a one-person achievement but requires divine capacity, natural laws, and others' cooperation, thus dedicating their ego to the Lord. Such a doer has immense patience (dhriti) to face obstacles and enthusiasm (utsaha) to move forward. Most importantly, they remain unaffected by success or failure. An example is a dedicated hospital nurse, who does her work with patience and enthusiasm but is not overly elated by a patient's recovery or deeply depressed by their death, remaining balanced. Such a worker achieves lasting success and brings welfare to the world.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The agent who is free from attachment; who does not make any speech of egoism; who is full of contentment and enthusiasm; and who does not change [mentally]  in success or in failure-that agent is said  to be of the Sattva (Strand) nature.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That agent is said to be Sattvika who is free from attachment, who does not make much of himself, who is endued with steadiness and zeal and is untouched by success and failure.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
[Ast. introduces this verse with 'Idanim kartrbhedah ucyate, Now is being stated the distinctions among the agents.'-Tr.] The agent who is free from attachment [Attachment to results or the idea of agentship.], not egotistic, endowed with fortitude and diligence, and unperturbed by success and failure is said to be possessed of sattva.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The Lord begins the three-fold classification of the agent. A Sattvic agent is free from attachment to fruits and egoistic pride, endowed with patience and diligence, motivated solely by scriptural authority.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He who is free from attachment, non-egotistic, endowed with fortitude and enthusiasm, and unaffected by success or failure, is called a Sattvic agent.

Commentary: 'Muktasangah' means free from attachment to objects, situations, or results. 'Anahamvadi' means free from the pride of being the doer or showing off one's sacrifices. 'Dhrti' is the persistence of patience even in the face of obstacles and criticism. 'Utsaha' is maintaining hope and vigor even during failure. 'Siddhyasiddhyor-nirvikarah' means remaining peaceful and cheerful whether the work is successfully completed or fails despite putting in full effort.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Muktasangah' is one who is free from attachment to fruits. 'Anahamvadi' is one who is devoid of the feeling of being the agent. He is endued with 'steadiness and zeal.' 'Steadiness' is perseverance in regard to an act that has been begun in spite of the pain that is inevitable till the completion of the work. 'Zeal' is the possession of an active mind. One who is enduded with these, and whose mind remains firm, untouched by success and failure in war etc., and also in gathering the material reisities for the work on hand - such an agent is, of Sattvika nature.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.26–18.29 jointly): Explains the threefold nature of the agent. An agent free from attachment and egoism, endowed with fortitude and enthusiasm, is Sattvika. An agent swayed by passion, craving fruit, greedy and impure, is Rajasa. An agent discordant, vulgar, obstinate, deceitful, and indolent is Tamasa.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Karta, the agent; who is mukta-sangah, free from attachment-one by whom attachment has been given up; anahamvadi, not egotisic, not given to asserting his ego; dhrti-utsaha-samanvitah, endowed with fortitude and diligenc; and nirvikarah, unperturbed; siddhi-asiddhyoh, by success and failure, in the fruition and non-fruition of any action under-taken-led only by the authority of the scriptures, not by attachment to results etc. [Etc. stands for attachment to work.];-the agent who is such, he is ucyate, said to be; sattvikah, possessed of sattva.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The agent who is free from attachment to fruits, devoid of egoistic doership, and unaffected by success or failure in their duty, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The agent who has abandoned attachment to fruits, does not praise oneself, keeps patience even when obstacles arise, maintains the resolve 'I will complete this work', and remains free from joy or grief upon success or failure, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The agent who has abandoned attachment to fruits, is free from boasting, endowed with patience in starting and enthusiasm in performing, and remains unaffected by success or failure of the work, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The agent who is free from attachment to fruits, not given to boasting 'I am the best', endowed with fortitude in obstacles and diligence in effort, and unaffected by success or failure, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The agent who is free from attachment, free from egotistic pride, endowed with perseverance in face of pain and actively engaged mind, and remains unperturbed by success or failure of action, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The agent who has abandoned attachment, speaks no egotistic words, possesses fortitude to endure suffering and zeal to achieve the highest, and is unaffected by success or failure of results, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The agent who has abandoned attachment, has no egoistic boasting, is endowed with patience and the firm resolve 'I will accomplish this', and is unaffected by success or failure, is Sattvic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who performs his duty without association with the modes of material nature, without false ego, with great determination and enthusiasm, and without wavering in success or failure is said to be a worker in the mode of goodness.

 A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is always transcendental to the material modes of nature. He has no expectations for the result of the work entrusted to him, because he is above false ego and pride. Still, he is always enthusiastic till the completion of such work. He does not worry about the distress undertaken; he is always enthusiastic. He does not care for success or failure; he is equal in both distress and happiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of goodness.