Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
adharmaṃ dharmamiti yā manyate tamasāvṛtā .
sarvārthānviparītāṃśca buddhiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī

Word Meanings:
अधर्मम् - Adharma
धर्मम् - Dharma
इति - thus
या - which
मन्यते - thinks
तमसा - by darkness
आवृता - covered
सर्वार्थान् - all things
विपरीतान् - perverted
च - and
बुद्धिः - intellect
सा - that
पार्थ - O Partha
तामसी - Tamasic .

Life Application:
Intellect enveloped in darkness, taking adharma to be dharma, reversing all values—is Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Partha, that intellect which, enveloped in darkness, regards Adharma as Dharma and perceives all things pervertedly (contrary to truth), is Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
That, which, enveloped in darkness, sees Adharma as Dharma and all things perverted  that intellect, O Arjuna, is Tamasic (dark).

अधर्मम् Adharma? धर्मम् Dharma? इति thus? या which? मन्यते thinks? तमसा by darkness? आवृता enveloped? सर्वार्थान् all things? विपरीतान् perverted? च and? बुद्धिः intellect? सा that? पार्थ O Partha? तामसी Tamasic (dark).Commentary That intellect which regards righteous acts as evil? and considers right things to be false? which treats everything in a contrary sense and looks upon virtues as if they were vices and takes everything that the scriptures declare to be good as being entirely wrong? is Tamasic. It views all things in a perverted light.Thus? O Arjuna? I have explained to thee the three aspects of the intellect. Now listen to the explanation of the characteristics of the three aspects of firmness.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
And that which, shrouded in Ignorance, thinks wrong right, and sees everything perversely, O Arjuna, that intellect is ruled by Darkness.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
While the Sattvic intellect knows things as they are, and the Rajasic intellect's knowledge is doubtful, the Tamasic intellect perceives things in a completely contrary manner. It regards Adharma as Dharma and Dharma as Adharma. In fact, the Tamasic intellect is not a true intellect at all; it is a bundle of erroneous ideas and perverted conclusions, caused by the darkness of ignorance and the blindness of ego.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The intellect  which, containing darkness (ignorance), conceives the unrighteous one as righteous and all things topsy-turvy-that intellect is deemed to be of the Tamas (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That Buddhi, O Arjuna, which, enveloped in darkness, regards Adharma as Dharma and which reverses every value, is Tamasika.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Parhta, that intellect is born of tamas which, being covered by darkness, considers vice as virtue, and verily perceives all things contrary ot what they are.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Enveloped in discrimination-free ignorance (darkness), the Tamasic intellect views everything contrary to truth, including righteousness, unrighteousness, and temporal duties.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O son of Pritha, that intellect is Tamasic which, enveloped in darkness, regards Adharma as Dharma and sees all things in a perverted way.

Commentary: Under the influence of Tamas, the intellect accepts prohibited sinful acts (like dishonesty, blasphemy, disrespect to elders) as Dharma, and rejects actual scriptural duties as Adharma. It turns everything topsy-turvy: it considers the body to be the self, the material world to be the only truth, and ignores the eternal soul. It mistakes transient pleasure for real happiness. Such a perverted intellect leads one to degradation.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
That Buddhi is of the nature of Tamas which is 'enveloped in Tamas' and 'reverses every value.' The meaning is that it regards Adharma as Dharma and Dharma as Adharma, existent as non-existent, and non-existent as existent, and higher truth as the lower and the lower truth as the higher, and thus reverses every value.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.30–18.32 jointly): Explains the threefold intellect. The intellect that knows action and renunciation, duty and non-duty, fear and fearlessness, bondage and release, is Sattvika. The intellect that misjudges dharma and adharma is Rajasa. The intellect enveloped in darkness that regards adharma as dharma is Tamasa.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O Partha, sa, that; buddhih, intellect; tamasi, is born of tamas; ya, which; tamasavrta, being covered by darkness; manyate, considers, understands; adharmam, vice, what is prohibited; iti, as; dharmam, virtue, what is prescribed; and ca, verily; perceives sarvarthan, all things, all objects of knowledge without exception; viparitan, contrary to what they are.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Covered by ignorance, the intellect which considers Adharma to be Dharma and sees all things topsy-turvy, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The intellect is Tamasic which, enveloped in darkness that prevents correct perception, regards Adharma as Dharma in unseen matters, and perverts all objects of knowledge in empirical matters.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The intellect which is perverted (grasps things incorrectly) is Tamasic. Knowledge is the state (vritti) of the intellect, and fortitude is also its state.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The intellect which, covered by non-discrimination, considers Adharma (prohibited) as Dharma (prescribed), and understands all objects of knowledge perversely, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Covered by Tamas, the intellect reverses all values, accepting Adharma as Dharma, the non-existent as existent, and lower truth as higher truth. It reflects the views of non-Vedic and false philosophies.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The intellect which, covered by ignorance, regards Adharma (non-divine acts) as Dharma (duty), and reverses everything (like duty as non-duty, fear as fearlessness), is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The intellect which grasps things contrary to their true nature is Tamasic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and religion to be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness, and strives always in the wrong direction, O Pārtha, is in the mode of ignorance.

 Intelligence in the mode of ignorance is always working the opposite of the way it should. It accepts religions which are not actually religions and rejects actual religion. Men in ignorance understand a great soul to be a common man and accept a common man as a great soul. They think truth to be untruth and accept untruth as truth. In all activities they simply take the wrong path; therefore their intelligence is in the mode of ignorance.