Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
pāñcajanyaṃ hṛṣīkeśo devadattaṃ dhanañjayaḥ .
pauṇḍraṃ dadhmau mahāśaṅkhaṃ bhīmakarmā vṛkodaraḥ

Word Meanings:
पाञ्चजन्यम् - Panchajanya conch
हृषीकेशः - Hrishikesha (Krishna)
देवदत्तम् - Devadatta conch
धनञ्जयः - Dhananjaya (Arjuna)
पौण्ड्रम् - Paundra conch
दध्मौ - blew
महाशङ्खम् - terrible conch
भीमकर्मा - doer of terrible deeds
वृकोदरः - Vrikodara (Bhima)

Life Application:
Express your unique capabilities boldly when called to duty, acting with courage alongside your teammates.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The Lord Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya, Dhananjaya (Arjuna) blew the Devadatta, and Bhima, doer of terrible deeds, blew the great conch named Paundra.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya and Arjuna blew the Devadatta
and Bhima (the wolf-bellied), the doer of terrible deeds, blew the great
conch Paundra.

पाञ्चजन्यम् (the conch named) Panchajanya? हृषीकेशः (the Lord of the senses) Krishna? देवदत्तम् (the conch named) Devadatta? धनञ्जयः (the victor of wealth) Arjuna? पौण्ड्रम् (the conch named) Poundra? दध्मौ blew? महाशङ्खम् great conch? भीमकर्मा doer of terrible dees? वृकोदरः (having the belly of a wolf) Bhima.No Commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Lord Shri Krishna blew his Panchajanya and Arjuna his Devadatta, brave Bheema his renowned shell, Poundra.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Describing the Pandava army, Sanjaya specifically names each warrior's conch. Lord Krishna's conch was named Panchajanya. Hrishikesha is one of the Lord's names, meaning 'Lord of the senses.' Hrishika (sense-organ) + a + Isha = Hrishikesha.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Hrsikesa  (Krsna)  blew the Pancajanya;  Dhananjaya (Arjuna) blew the Devadatta;  and the Wolf-bellied (Bhimi),  of the terrible deeds,  blew the mighty conchshell,   Paundra;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Sri Krsna blew his conch, Pancajanya, Arjuna his Devadatta and Bhima of terrible deeds his great conch Paundra.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Hrsikesa (Krsna) (blew the conch) Pancajanya; Dhananjaya (Arjuna) (the conch) Devadatta; and Vrkodara (Bhima) of terrible deeds blew the great conch Paundra;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
This verse conveys precisely the divine nature of those two conches, in 'Panchajanyam...'. Seeing Keshava and Arjuna eager for battle, Bhimasena too, delighting in combat by nature, became filled with joy and eager for battle -- this is conveyed in 'Paundram...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The all-pervading, indwelling Lord Sri Krishna blew the conch named Panchajanya, and Dhananjaya Arjuna blew the conch named Devadatta; and Vrikodara Bhima, doer of terrible deeds, blew the great conch named Paundra.

Explanation: 'Panchajanyam Hrishikeshah' -- the indwelling Lord Sri Krishna Himself, who knows the inner heart of all, standing on the Pandavas' side, blew the conch named 'Panchajanya.' The Lord had killed a demon named Panchajana who had taken the form of a conch, and took that conch-form for His own -- hence this conch came to be named 'Panchajanya.'

'Devadattam Dhananjayah' -- at the time of the Rajasuya sacrifice, Arjuna conquered many kings and gathered great wealth; for this reason Arjuna came to be named 'Dhananjaya.' While fighting the demons Nivatakavacha and others, Indra gave Arjuna the conch named 'Devadatta.' Its sound was extremely loud and would terrify enemy armies. Arjuna blew this conch.

'Paundram dadhmau mahashankham bhimakarma vrikodarah' -- because he slew demons such as Hidimbasura, Bakasura, and Jatasura, as well as mighty warriors like Kichaka and Jarasandha, Bhimasena came to be named 'Bhimakarma' (doer of terrible deeds). In his belly, besides the ordinary digestive fire, there was a special fire called 'Vrika,' by which he could digest enormous quantities of food; hence he came to be named 'Vrikodara.' Such a Bhimakarma Vrikodara Bhimasena blew the very large conch named 'Paundra.'

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Dhrtarastra said - Sanjaya said  Duryodhana, after viewing the forces of Pandavas protected by Bhima, and his own forces protected by Bhisma conveyed his views thus to Drona, his teacher, about the adeacy of Bhima's forces for conering the Kaurava forces and the inadeacy of his own forces for victory against the Pandava forces. He was grief-stricken within.

Observing his (Duryodhana's) despondecny, Bhisma, in order to cheer him, roared like a lion, and then blowing his conch, made his side sound their conchs and kettle-drums, which made an uproar as a sign of victory. Then, having heard that great tumult, Arjuna and Sri Krsna the Lord of all lords, who was acting as the charioteer of Arjuna, sitting in their great chariot which was powerful enough to coner the three worlds; blew their divine conchs Srimad Pancajanya and Devadatta. Then, both Yudhisthira and Bhima blew their respective conchs separately. That tumult rent asunder the hearts of your sons, led by Duryodhana. The sons of Dhrtarastra then thought, 'Our cause is almost lost now itself.' So said Sanjaya to Dhrtarastra who was longing for their victory.

Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra:  Then, seeing the Kauravas, who were ready for battle, Arjuna, who had Hanuman, noted for his exploit of burning Lanka, as the emblem on his flag on his chariot, directed his charioteer Sri Krsna, the Supreme Lord-who is overcome by parental love for those who take shelter in Him who is the treasure-house of knowledge, power, lordship, energy, potency and splendour, whose sportive delight brings about the origin, sustentation and dissolution of the entire cosmos at His will, who is the Lord of the senses, who controls in all ways the senses inner and outer of all, superior and inferior - by saying, 'Station my chariot in an appropriate place in order that I may see exactly my enemies who are eager for battle.'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavgupta did not comment upon these slokas.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Then Yudhishthira, Bhima and the others each blew their own conches separately. That uproar rent asunder the hearts of Duryodhana's sons.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The names 'Panchajanya,' 'Devadatta,' 'Paundra,' 'Anantavijaya,' 'Sughosha,' and 'Manipushpaka' are given -- the point being that on the enemy's side, each conch is famous by its own name, whereas in your own army not a single conch is famous by a name of its own; this is stated to convey the enemy's superior distinction. The word 'Hrishikesha' conveys that, as the inner controller who impels all senses, He is the (true) helper of the Pandavas. The word 'Dhananjaya' conveys that, having conquered all kings in his conquest of the quarters and brought back wealth, Arjuna is in every way unconquerable. He whose deeds include the slaying of Hidimba and the like is called 'Bhimasena,' immensely strong from digesting vast quantities of food, hence 'Vrikodara.'

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Showing this same fact by way of division, he says 'Panchajanyam...': Panchajanya and the rest are the names of the conches belonging to Krishna and the others. He whose deeds are terrible (bhima), and whose belly is like a wolf's (vrika-udara) -- that Vrikodara blew the great conch named Paundra.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The word 'Hrishikesha' (Lord of the senses) conveys that He grants strength to the sense-organs -- hands and the rest -- of the Pandavas, whereas for the enemy He instead takes that strength away. In his conquest of the quarters and the cattle-raid, Arjuna conquered kings and even Bhishma and others, bringing back wealth and cattle; hence the word 'Dhananjaya' conveys that he is unconquerable by all. Hearing the conch-blasts of Madhava and Arjuna, Bhimasena too, delighting by nature in battle, became filled with joy and blew his own conch -- this is stated in 'Paundram...'. Being capable of terrible deeds such as drinking Duhshasana's blood, and since even that blood he drank would be digested by the 'Vrika' fire in his belly, he is indicated by the two words 'Bhimakarma' and 'Vrikodara.' Some say: he whose deeds include the slaying of Hidimba and the like is called 'Bhimakarma,' immensely strong from digesting vast quantities of food, hence 'Vrikodara.'

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
To make vivid the exceptional character of these conches -- already stated to be divine -- their proper names Panchajanya and Devadatta are given. Similarly, the naming of all four conches belonging to Bhimasena and the others individually. The phrase 'blew separately, each his own' conveys that they blew in such a way that each single conch-sound alone would be enough to rend the hearts of Dhritarashtra's sons; or alternatively, that they blew one after another in sequence, each to express his own particular delight. In the following verse's 'that uproar,' though it resounds through both sky and earth, the construal is that it specifically rent the hearts of Dhritarashtra's sons alone -- for others it was, instead, a cause of joy. The phrase 'of all your sons' is used, together with the plural, to convey that not a single one among them possessed a steady mind. The verb 'vyadarayat' (rent asunder) is glossed word by word to bring out the intended sense -- 'bibheda' (split/pierced). As to how a mere sound, like a weapon, could rend hearts, this is explained by the phrase 'even now' -- the very thought, in those confident of their own army's victory, that this army might now be destroyed, is itself what constitutes the 'rending of hearts.' Since Dhritarashtra, eager to hear of his sons' victory, was asking about it, Sanjaya, in this manner already described, in effect told him something foreshadowing their defeat -- this is what is meant.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
To convey the greatness of Krishna's and the others' conches, their names are given, in two parts: 'Panchajanyam...' etc. Hrishikesha blew Panchajanya. The names Panchajanya and the rest are stated to convey the glory of these conches. It is named 'Panchajanya' from its association with the demon Panchajana. 'Devadattam' means given by Agni. 'Paundra' and the others should be understood, along with their distinguishing qualities, from their respective legends. Since He who impels all the senses was Himself entering battle, all senses would naturally be roused of themselves -- this is conveyed by the word 'Hrishikesha.' Dhananjaya blew Devadatta -- 'dhanam jayah asya jaye yasya' (he for whom wealth is victory, or he whose victory is wealth). The great conch Paundra, inherently very heavy, was blown by Bhimakarma, the doer of fearsome deeds, Vrikodara Bhimasena. [A traditional verse is cited:] 'Devotion, knowledge with detachment, wisdom, intellect, steadfastness, endurance, yoga, life-breath, and strength -- these are called Vrikodara [the ten forms of vital force]; Bhima is that same wind-deity embodied.'

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Abhyahanyanta' means 'were struck' -- the verb is used in an impersonal/passive-like construction.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Lord Kṛṣṇa blew His conchshell, called Pāñcajanya; Arjuna blew his, the Devadatta; and Bhīma, the voracious eater and performer of herculean tasks, blew his terrific conchshell, called Pauṇḍra.

 Lord Kṛṣṇa is referred to as Hṛṣīkeśa in this verse because He is the owner of all senses. The living entities are part and parcel of Him, and therefore the senses of the living entities are also part and parcel of His senses. The impersonalists cannot account for the senses of the living entities, and therefore they are always anxious to describe all living entities as senseless, or impersonal. The Lord, situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs their senses. But He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity, and in the case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra the Lord directly controls the transcendental senses of Arjuna, and thus His particular name of Hṛṣīkeśa. The Lord has different names according to His different activities. For example, His name is Madhusūdana because He killed the demon of the name Madhu; His name is Govinda because He gives pleasure to the cows and to the senses; His name is Vāsudeva because He appeared as the son of Vasudeva; His name is Devakī-nandana because He accepted Devakī as His mother; His name is Yaśodā-nandana because He awarded His childhood pastimes to Yaśodā at Vṛndāvana; His name is Pārtha-sārathi because He worked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna. Similarly, His name is Hṛṣīkeśa because He gave direction to Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. Arjuna is referred to as Dhanañjaya in this verse because he helped his elder brother in fetching wealth when it was required by the king to make expenditures for different sacrifices. Similarly, Bhīma is known as Vṛkodara because he could eat as voraciously as he could perform herculean tasks, such as killing the demon Hiḍimba. So the particular types of conchshell blown by the different personalities on the side of the Pāṇḍavas, beginning with the Lord’s, were all very encouraging to the fighting soldiers. On the other side there were no such credits, nor the presence of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the supreme director, nor that of the goddess of fortune. So they were predestined to lose the battle – and that was the message announced by the sounds of the conchshells.