Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śrībhagavānuvāca .
kālo.asmi lokakṣayakṛtpravṛddho lokānsamāhartumiha pravṛttaḥ .
ṛte.api tvāṃ na bhaviṣyanti sarve ye.avasthitāḥ pratyanīkeṣu yodhāḥ

Word Meanings:
कालः - time
अस्मि - I am
लोकक्षयकृत् - worlddestroying
प्रवृद्धः - fullgrown
लोकान् - the worlds
समाहर्तुम् - to destroy
इह - here
प्रवृत्तः - engaged
ऋते - without
अपि - also
त्वाम् - thee
न - not
भविष्यन्ति - shall live
सर्वे - all
ये - these
अवस्थिताः - arrayed
प्रत्यनीकेषु - in hostile armies
योधाः - warriors.

Life Application:
Understand that time is the mighty destroyer of worlds, pursuing its inevitable work regardless of human wishes.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The Blessed Lord said — I am the mighty, world-destroying Time. At this time, I am engaged in destroying these worlds. Even without you, all the warriors standing in the hostile armies shall cease to exist.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Blessed Lord said  I am the full-grown world-destroying Time, now engaged in destroying the worlds. Even without thee, none of the warriors arrayed in the hostile armies shall live.

कालः time? अस्मि (I) am? लोकक्षयकृत् worlddestroying? प्रवृद्धः fullgrown? लोकान् the worlds? समाहर्तुम् to destroy? इह here? प्रवृत्तः engaged? ऋते without? अपि also? त्वाम् thee? न not? भविष्यन्ति shall live? सर्वे all? ये these? अवस्थिताः arrayed? प्रत्यनीकेषु in hostile armies? योधाः warriors.Commentary Even without thee Even if thou? O Arjuna? wouldst not fight? these warriors are doomed to die under My dispensation. I am the alldestroying Time. I have already slain them. You have seen them dying. Therefore thy instrumentality is not of much importance.Such being the case? therefore? stand up and obtain fame.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Lord Shri Krishna replied: I have shown myself to thee as the Destroyer who lays waste the world and whose purpose is destruction. In spite of thy efforts, all these warriors gathered for battle shall not escape death.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Without destroying one state of an object, its reconstruction is not possible. The world is created only through a continuous process of destruction. Today's present has emerged from the graveyard of the past. The power that is visibly working behind this creative destruction is the fundamental power that rules over the lives of living beings. Lord Krishna here introduces Himself as the world-destroying Mahakala (Great Time). His purpose in assuming this form is to destroy that generation which has become decayed due to holding contrary concepts and faulty life values regarding their life goal. The Lord's world-destroying aspect is not opposed to His world-welfare aspect. Sometimes, there is mercy in destruction. Demolishing a broken bridge, a dilapidated dam, or an ancient building are examples of this. Demolishing them is an act of mercy? that any thoughtful administration can do for society. The same principle applies here. In assuming this fierce form, the Lord's objective is to destroy all those negative forces that are bent upon destroying the cultural life of the nation. With this statement of the Lord, Arjuna's hope of victory is converted into conviction. But the Lord also makes it clear that He is not dependent on any single individual or community to carry out this work of reconstruction. Time alone is capable of doing this work. It alone will bring this resurrection and rejuvenation in society. In this colossal work of universal rehabilitation, individual beings are mere creatures of destiny. Whether they exist or not, the plan of Time will definitely be implemented. This rejuvenation is necessary for the nation, the rehabilitation of man is the demand of the world. The Lord clearly says that, even without you, none of these materialistic warriors will survive this certain destruction. In the context of the Mahabharata story, the clear meaning of the Lord's statement is that the Kaurava army has already been slain by Time, and by cooperating with the army of resurrection, Arjuna is only associating himself with certain success. Therefore, Arjuna, the representative of man of all times, is advised to perform his duty in life without fear.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The Bhagavat said  I am the Time, the world-destroyer, engaged here in withdrawing the worlds that are overgrown; even without you (your fighting)  all the warriors, standing in the rival armies, would cease to be.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Lord said  I am the world-destroying Time. Manifesting Myself fully, I have begun to destroy the worlds here. Even without You, none of the warriors arrayed in the hostile ranks shall survive.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The Blessed Lord said  I am the world-destroying Time, [Time: The supreme God with His limiting adjunct of the power of action.] grown in stature [Pravrddhah, mighty-according to S.-Tr.] and now engaged in annihilating the creatures. Even without you, all the warriors who are arrayed in the confronting armies will cease to exist!

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The word 'Kala' (Time) denotes all the attributes of the Lord, such as binding the world, severing, knowledge, etc. They read: 'kala bandhane' (in binding), 'kala chhedane' (in cutting/severing), 'kala jnane' (in knowing), and 'kala kamadhenu' (granting all desires). And this word is well-known for the Lord.
In the Moksha Dharma, Bali, bound by Vishnu, says: 'O Indra, you boast in vain, bound as you are by the rope of time. This dark Purusha takes away the creatures of the world. The fierce one stands binding me like an animal with a rope.'
Also in the Bhagavata: 'One should fix the mind on Vishnu, the Supreme Lord in the form of Time [11.15.15].'
'Pravrddhah' means completely full or beginningless. Indeed, there is the Shruti: 'Right and truth arose from the kindled...' [Rig Veda 8.8.49.1] and 'This is the great Being' [Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 2.4.12]. And 'May Vishnu be more praiseworthy than the strong; indeed, fierce is the name of this ancient one' [Rig Veda 5.6.25.3], but it does not mean physical growth or modification.
For the Bhagavata says: 'He was not born, nor will He die, nor does He grow.'
In the Moksha Dharma: 'Whose divine form neither decreases nor increases.'
And in the Shruti 'not by action...' [Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4.23] — if He does not grow even by action, what to say of Him growing by Himself?
He is specially engaged here in destroying (withdrawing) the worlds. The word 'api' (also/even) in 'rte api' (even without) implies 'even without brothers' etc. Hostility (pratyanikatvam) is mutual. 'All will not exist' — the plural is appropriate because of the divisions of Akshauhini (armies) etc.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
In the words 'Sri Bhagavan [said]', it is described that the Lord declared Himself and the purpose of His action. 'Kala' (Time) refers to the Supreme Lord associated with the power of action (kriya-shakti). The word 'asmi' (I am) is intended to signify the association of Time with the current war. An objection might be: 'Even if there is your endeavor to destroy the worlds, it is of no use since the opponents like Bhishma and others cannot be destroyed without my effort.' To answer this, the Lord says 'rte api' (even without you).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Sri Bhagavan said — I am the mighty, world-destroying Time, and now I am engaged here in destroying these worlds. Even without you, all the warriors standing in the hostile armies shall cease to exist.

Commentary:
[On reflection, the Cosmic Form of the Lord appears extremely extraordinary; because even Arjuna's divine vision is not working fully in seeing it, and he describes the Cosmic Form as difficult to look at — 'durnirikṣyaṃ samantāt' (11.17). Here too, he asks the Lord, who are you of this fierce form? It seems that if Arjuna, being terrified, had not asked this, the Lord would have continued to manifest in even more extraordinary forms. But since Arjuna asked in the middle, the Lord stopped showing further forms and started answering Arjuna's question.]
'kālo'smi lokakṣayakṛtpravṛddhaḥ' — In the previous verse, Arjuna had asked who are you of this fierce form — 'ākhyāhi me ko bhavānugrarūpaḥ'. In reply to that, the Cosmic Form Lord says: I am the imperishable Time, grown in a very fierce form, to destroy all the worlds.
'lokānsamāhartumiha pravṛttaḥ' — Arjuna had asked, 'I do not know your purpose' — 'na hi prajānāmi tava pravṛttim', meaning what have you come here to do? In reply to that, the Lord says: At this time, I have come here for the destruction of both the armies.
'ṛte'pi tvāṃ na bhaviṣyanti sarve ye'vasthitāḥ pratyanīkeṣu yodhāḥ' — You had said earlier that 'I will not fight' — 'na yotsye' (2.9); so, will these opponents not die without your fighting? That is, it will make no difference whether you fight or not. The reason is that I am engaged in destroying everyone. You have seen this in the Cosmic Form as well, that both the armies, of your side and the opponent's side, are entering My terrible mouths.
Here a doubt arises that Arjuna saw all the people from both his side and the Kaurava side entering the Lord's mouths and being destroyed, so why did the Lord mention only the opponents here, saying that even without your fighting these opponents will not remain? The solution is that if Arjuna fought, he would kill only the opponents, and if he did not fight, he would not kill the opponents. Therefore, the Lord says: even without you killing them, these opponents will not survive; because I, in the form of Time, will devour everyone. The point is that the destruction of all of these is bound to happen anyway, you just perform your duty in the form of fighting.

Another doubt arises: Here the Lord says to Arjuna that the warriors of the opposing side will not remain even without your fighting; then how did opponents like Ashvatthama and others survive in this war? The solution is that here the Lord has spoken of the death of only those warriors whom Arjuna could kill and whom Arjuna would kill in the future. Therefore, the meaning of the Lord's statement is that all the warriors whom you can kill will die even without you killing them. Those whom you will kill in the future have already been slain by Me beforehand — 'mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvameva' (11.33).

Connection: In the previous verse, the Lord said that even without you killing them, these opposing warriors will not remain. Under such circumstances, what should Arjuna do? The Lord answers this in the next two verses.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The Lord said  Kala (Time) is the calculator which calculates (Kalayati). Calculating the end of the lives of all those under the leadership of Dhrtarastra's sons, I am causing their destruction. Fully manifesting Myself with this fierce form, I have begun to destroy the hosts of kings. Therefore, by My will, even without you, namely, even without your effort, all these hostile warriors under the leadership of Dhrtarastra's sons, shall cease to be, i.e., will be destroyed.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Asmi, I am; the loka-ksaya-krt, world-destroying; kalah, Time; pravrddhah, grown in stature. Hear the purpose for which I have grown in stature: I am iha, now; pravrttah, engaged; samahartum, in annihilating; lokan, the creatures. Api, even; rte tva, without you; sarve, all-from whom your apprehension had arisen; the yodhah, warriors-Bhisma, Drona, Karna and others; ye, who are; avasthitah, arrayed; pratyanikesu, in the connfronting armies-in every unit of the army confronting the other; na bhavisyanti, will cease to exist.
Since this is so-

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
In that case, the answer 'I am Time' would be improper because the attributes (dharma) are not mentioned. To address this, he says 'kala...' It means the word 'Kala' expresses the Lord qualified by His attributes. Why so? He says 'kala...' Just as the Kamadhenu grants all desires, this root also denotes all meanings. Thus, from this, the suffix 'an' or 'ghanj' is applied in the sense of the agent. 'World' is connected here based on compatibility. Let this word denote attributes like binding etc., but why does it denote the Lord, since it is conventionally used elsewhere? To this, he says: 'and it is well-known (for the Lord)'. Bali says to the bound one: 'You boast to me, who am bound, but praise yourself. Who is Time? How does this dark Purusha take away the creatures? The fierce one stands binding me...' How is the reference to Vishnu determined here? He says: 'by Vishnu...'. The one whose form is named Time is called so. 'Pravrddhah' suggests a temporary growth; therefore, he says 'pravrddhah...' Growth is the meaning of the root. And by the prefix 'pra', a growth that is eternal in terms of space and time is intended. It also implies being beginningless (eternal). Since the past participle suffix 'kta' is prescribed in the sense of past, how can it be eternal? It is due to its usage, as he says 'rtam ca...' (Right and truth...), similar to 'iddhad bhutum'.
Even if there is uncertainty about its eternality here, he says 'pra vishnur...' because there are Shrutis confirming the eternal nature of the Lord's splendor and existence. Vishnu is 'staviyan' — of exceedingly superior splendor compared to the powerful ones like the sun which are limited by space and time. Therefore, indeed, the name of this 'sthavirasya' (ancient/eternal one) is 'tvesha' (fierce), which is an extraordinary designation. Even if it is so, why shouldn't it mean that He was small before and has grown now? To this, he says: 'na tu...' (not indeed...). The word 'tu' is for distinction. Growth in the form of physical modification is not the cause for using the word 'pravrddha', because modification is forbidden in the Lord. Even if there is no growth in the form of modification in the Lord, could it be in His Cosmic Form? To this, he says: 'yasya...' (whose...).
One might argue: In the Shruti 'He does not grow by action, nor does He become smaller', since only action-induced growth is forbidden, it implies there is growth in general, otherwise the qualification ('by action') would be useless. Thus, there is a counter-argument. To this, he says: 'na...' (no). The specific prohibition 'not by action' is meant to show that when He does not grow even by action — which is a possible cause of modification in the form of growth — then what to say of Him growing by Himself without action? This is to show a fortiori (kaimutya) the prohibition of any cause of growth in the form of modification; thus, it is explained otherwise.
One might ask: Since the Lord is the destroyer of all worlds everywhere, why is the word 'iha' (here) used? To this, he says: 'lokan...'. It means 'specially' because He is destroying many at the same time and in a visible manner. Since Yudhishthira and others remain, why did the Lord say 'without you' (tvam rte)? To this, he says: 'and brothers...' The word 'api' implies this.
If it is said that the warriors standing in the armies hostile to us will not remain, then how do the Pandavas fit in, such that it is said 'even without you'? To this, he says: 'pratyanikatvam...' (hostility). It means 'hostility of both the armies'. Why is it explained so? He says: 'all of them...'. It means 'those belonging to both armies'. How to explain the plural in 'pratyanikesu' (in hostile armies)? He says: 'akshauhini...' due to the many divisions of the armies.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Thus prayed, the Supreme Lord replied with three verses starting with 'kalo'smi'. I am that Time who has manifested now. Indeed, I am fourfold, through the divisions of Akshara (imperishable), Kala (Time), Karma (action), and Svabhava (nature); therefore, know Me, even as the Akshara, in the form of Time, indicated by attributes like devouring (licking) etc. As stated in the Srimad Bhagavatam: 'He who, in the form of the Purusha within and in the form of Time without, accompanies all living beings by His own Maya, is the Lord.' And also: 'O wise one, describe the exploits of Him, who appears as a human by His Maya, who bestows death and immortality upon all embodied beings through His inner Purusha form and outer Time form.' [Bhagavata 10.1.7] Due to His form as Time, He is the cause of death for those possessed by demonic qualities (asuraveshinam); thus He says: 'engaged here in withdrawing the worlds (the demonic ones)'. This very aspect of Sankarshana is displayed by the Lord. Sankarshana is indeed the destroyer; and in the Mahabharata, it is described that the incarnation of His hair as the form of the Lord on earth was for removing the burden of the earth. And thus, as Time, I am engaged in destroying those who are the burden of the earth. 'rte api tvam' (even without you) is an illustration (upalaksana), meaning 'I am engaged in destroying everyone except those who are favored by My grace'. Or the connection is: 'Without you as the instrumental cause of killing, they will not live'. The reply 'na bhavisyanti' (they shall cease to exist) is given with the intention: 'O Partha, even if they are not to be killed by you, they will indeed be devoured by Me in the form of Time and disappear'.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Thus requested by Arjuna as to who He is and what the purpose of His action is, Sri Bhagavan spoke all this in three verses starting with 'kalo'smi'. I am the Supreme Lord, the destroyer of all, associated with the power of action (kriya-shakti), and I have now grown in stature. Hear the purpose for which I am engaged: I am here at this time engaged in withdrawing (destroying) the worlds, namely Duryodhana and others, in order to devour them. If it is asked: 'How can this be without my participation?' He says, 'rte api' (even without). Even without you, Arjuna the warrior, even without your activity, by My activity alone they shall cease to exist, i.e., they will be destroyed. All the warriors — Bhishma, Drona, Karna and others, who are considered invincible in battle, and others who are arrayed in the opposing armies — all of them will cease to exist because they have already been slain by Me. The meaning is that your effort in this is of no consequence.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Thus prayed, the Supreme Lord replied with three verses starting with 'kalo'smi'. I am the extremely fierce, world-destroying Time. I am engaged here in this world in destroying (withdrawing) the living beings. Therefore, 'rte api tvam' (even without you): even without you as the killer, they will not exist, i.e., they will not live. Even if they are not to be killed by you, they will surely die being devoured by Me in the form of Time. Who are they? All those warriors who are arrayed in the opposing forces (pratyanikesu) of Bhishma, Drona and others, in all the armies.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Thus asked, Sri Bhagavan replied. I am Time, the destroyer of the worlds (lokaksayakrt). I have grown in stature. 'Iha' means at this time. If it is asked: 'Why did the Acharyas not explain it as 'in this world' or 'in this battle'?' It is because Time itself is the subject matter and primary, and it is a rule that pronouns refer to the primary object; hence, 'engaged in withdrawing the worlds'. Will all worlds cease to exist? To this, He says: 'those like Bhishma, Drona and others who are arrayed in the opposing army, all of them will cease to exist'. If it is asked: 'Without me, the warrior, how can all of them be destroyed?' He replies: 'rte api tvam' (even without you). The meaning is that even if you abandon the activity of war, they are bound to be destroyed by My form as Time.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Summarizing the meaning of the three verses starting with 'kalo'smi', he first introduces them with the words 'ashrita...' (out of excessive affection for His dependents). By 'excessive affection for dependents', the inappropriateness of showing a terrifying form is indicated. He answers the two points, 'to do so' and 'with this intention', in a step-by-step manner starting with 'by Partha's effort...'. If the word 'Kala' (Time) here refers only to the physical entity of time consisting of moments, hours, etc., then its identity (co-referentiality) with the Lord would be inappropriate. Therefore, either His being the inner controller (antaryamin) should be accepted as in the Indra-Prana-Adhikarana; or its derivative meaning should be accepted as in the Akasha-Prana-Adhikarana; or it should be taken to refer to the specific form to be meditated upon, characterized by being the Lord who identifies Himself as the destroyer, distinct from the time of creation and preservation. Among these three, since the derivative meaning of the word 'Kala' is perceived and cannot be abandoned as it is required in the present context, he says: 'kalayati' (he calculates). Although it has meanings like connection etc., 'ganayati' (calculates) is mentioned here as it is conducive to destruction. He connects it with the specific context by saying 'of all...'. The explanation of 'loka' as 'rajaloka' (host of kings) is as before.
'Pravrddhah' means the greatness of form is intended, as he says 'grown with a fierce form'. Or it means being ready to devour. By 'samahartum', gathering together is not intended as it is irrelevant here, nor is it mere destruction as that would make 'lokaksayakrt' redundant; therefore, destruction itself is qualified by another prefix inserted in between (sam-a-hartum), as he says: 'in confronting manner' (abhimukhyena), meaning directly (aparokshata). The meaning is that this destruction is not indirect, like servants defeating enemies. Or the mere facing is the cause of destruction.
In accordance with: 'For Him who creates and destroys the universe by His mere mind, what effort is needed to destroy the enemy forces?' [Vishnu Purana 5.22.15], he says: 'Therefore, by My will alone'. The intention is: 'You are merely the instrumental agent of action'; hence he says, 'even without your effort'.
If it is said 'they will not exist' (na bhavisyanti), it might be understood as 'they will not be born'. To exclude that, he shows that it refers to the denial of existence in future time, by saying: 'they will be destroyed' (vinankshyanti).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus requested, Sri Bhagavan spoke three verses starting with 'kalo'smi'. I am Time, the destroyer of the worlds (lokaksayakrt), grown in stature (pravrddhah), i.e., powerful, engaged here in withdrawing (samahartum), i.e., destroying and merging within Myself, the worlds, i.e., the living beings, outwardly. The meaning is that My form, which was seen by you as having the warriors in between the teeth, is indeed of the nature of Time. Except for you (rte), the observer and the recipient of My grace, all the warriors arrayed in the opposing armies (pratyanikesu) will cease to exist, i.e., will not remain. Since I, in the form of Time, am engaged in the destruction of all. By saying 'except for you, all will cease to exist', it is indicated that these have been slain for your sake indeed.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Thus requested by Arjuna, the Lord replied with 'kala...'. I am the Supreme Lord named Time, the destroyer of the worlds (lokaksayakrt), great and grown in stature, engaged here in this battle in withdrawing, i.e., devouring, the worlds. Since this is so, therefore even without you (rte api tva), even without you, all will cease to exist, i.e., will die. Who are all these? Those brave warriors like Bhishma and others arrayed in the opposing forces (pratyanikesu), the enemy armies.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Time I am, the great destroyer of the worlds, and I have come here to destroy all people. With the exception of you [the Pāṇḍavas], all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.

 Although Arjuna knew that Kṛṣṇa was his friend and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was puzzled by the various forms exhibited by Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he asked further about the actual mission of this devastating force. It is written in the Vedas that the Supreme Truth destroys everything, even the brāhmaṇas. As stated in the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.2.25), yasya brahma ca kṣatraṁ ca ubhe bhavata odanaḥ mṛtyur yasyopasecanaṁ ka itthā veda yatra saḥ Eventually all the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and everyone else are devoured like a meal by the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is the all-devouring giant, and here Kṛṣṇa presents Himself in that form of all-devouring time. Except for a few Pāṇḍavas, everyone who was present on that battlefield would be devoured by Him. Arjuna was not in favor of the fight, and he thought it was better not to fight; then there would be no frustration. In reply, the Lord is saying that even if he did not fight, every one of them would be destroyed, for that was His plan. If Arjuna stopped fighting, they would die in another way. Death could not be checked, even if he did not fight. In fact, they were already dead. Time is destruction, and all manifestations are to be vanquished by the desire of the Supreme Lord. That is the law of nature.