Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
arjuna uvāca .
sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrtyā jagatprahṛṣyatyanurajyate ca .
rakṣāṃsi bhītāni diśo dravanti sarve namasyanti ca siddhasaṅghāḥ

Word Meanings:
स्थाने - it is meet
हृषीकेश - O Krishna
तव - Thy
प्रकीर्त्या - by praise
जगत् - the world
प्रहृष्यति - is delighted
अनुरज्यते - rejoices
च - and
रक्षांसि - the demons
भीतानि - in fear
दिशः - to all arters
द्रवन्ति - fly
सर्वे - all
नमस्यन्ति - bow
च - and
सिद्धसङ्घाः - hosts of perfected beings

Life Application:
Rejoice that the world delights in divine glory, while negative forces flee and saintly souls bow in reverence.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Arjuna said - It is but proper that the world is delighted and feels attraction by Your glorification. The terrified demons flee in all directions and all the groups of Siddhas bow down to You.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Arjuna said  It is meet, O Krishna, that the world delights and rejoices in Thy praise; demons fly in fear to all arters and the hosts of the perfected ones bow to Thee.

स्थाने it is meet? हृषीकेश O Krishna? तव Thy? प्रकीर्त्या by praise? जगत् the world? प्रहृष्यति is delighted? अनुरज्यते rejoices? च and? रक्षांसि the demons? भीतानि in fear? दिशः to all arters? द्रवन्ति fly? सर्वे all? नमस्यन्ति bow (to Thee)? च and? सिद्धसङ्घाः the hosts of the perfected ones.Commentary Praise description of the glory of the Lord. The Lord is the object worthy of adortion? love and delight? because He is the Self and friend of all beings.The Lord is the object of adoration? love and delight for the following reason also. He is the primal cause even of Brahma? the Creator of the universe.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Arjuna said: My Lord! It is natural that the world revels and rejoices when it sings the praises of Thy glory; the demons fly in fear and the saints offer Thee their salutations.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Through the poetic and evocative charm, we are once again lifted from the pleasant royal palace of wealth and grandeur and taken to the clamour of the battlefield and the wondrous cosmic form (Virat-rupa). The scene is that Arjuna, with folded hands, trembling with fear and with a voice choked with awe, is singing the praises of the Lord. This picture is a clear indicator of Arjuna's state of mind. This section of eleven verses of praise represents the best prayers available in Hinduism. Indeed, it is well known to common people that in terms of concept, beauty, rhythm, and depth of meaning, no greater universal prayer can be imagined. In this section, we see that Arjuna's capacity for philosophical perception is gradually recognizing the divine infinite Truth behind this cosmic form. When a person is looking at his reflection in a mirror, he is generally not even aware of the surface of the mirror, but if he focuses his attention on that surface, the reflection almost disappears for him. Here too, as long as Arjuna remained busy seeing only the individual forms within that universal form, he could not recognize the infinite nature, which is the essence of this vast form. Now from this section it becomes clear that Arjuna had started recognizing the real truth and meaning of the cosmic form.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Arjuna said  O Lord of sense-organs (Krsna) !  It is appropriate that the universe rejoices and feels  exceedingly delighted by the high glory of yours;  that in fear the demons fly on all directions; and that the hosts of the perfected ones bow down [to You].

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Arjuna said  Rightly it is, O Krsna, that Your praise should move the world to joy and love. The Raksasas flee in fear on all sides, and all the hosts of Siddhas bow down to You.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Arjuna said  It is proper, O Hrsikesa, that the world becomes delighted and attracted by Your praise; that the Raksasas, stricken with fear, run in all directions; and that all the groups of the Siddhas bow down (toYou).

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
What is about to be said, that is 'sthane', meaning it is indeed proper. He is called 'Hrsikesa' because He causes delight to the world as the inner controller of Agni (fire), Soma (moon), etc. The rays (amsus) are called 'kesa' (hair) because they are controlled by Him; the proof of this is in the statement 'having the moon and sun as eyes' (11.19). He is also called 'Hrsikesa' because He is the lord (isa) of the senses (hrisikas). His lordship over them specifically is well-known from passages like 'He who dwells in the breath...' (Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 3.7.16), and from usages like 'My senses do not fall into the evil path.' The other meaning is established in the Moksha-dharma: 'By my hair-like rays which illuminate and sustain the sun and the moon, the world is created. O son of Pandu, because of these actions of illuminating, sustaining, and causing delight to the world through Agni and Soma, I am known as Hrsikesa, the great ruler, the boon-giver, and the creator of the world.'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
To show what choked words Arjuna spoke to the Lord, Sanjay says 'Arjuna said'. He explains how 'sthane' qualifies the object (vishaya), meaning 'it is proper'. He gives the reason why the Lord is the proper object of delight, etc., by saying 'since'. He states that the world attains love (attraction) along with delight by Your praise: 'likewise'. 'And that' refers to the attainment of love. In response to the doubt, 'Since the Raksasas, who are opponents and a part of the world, are terrified, how can the world feel delight and love?', he says, 'Moreover...'. And for this reason also, the world's delight towards the Lord is proper, he says: 'All [the groups of Siddhas bow down].'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Arjuna said — O inner controller, O Lord! By singing Thy names, attributes and pastimes, this entire world is rejoicing and attaining attachment (love). Being terrified by the chanting of Thy name, attributes, etc., the demons are fleeing in all ten directions, and all the hosts of perfected ones are bowing down to Thee. It is indeed proper that all this is happening.

Commentary— [It is observed in the world that a person who is extremely terrified is unable to speak. Arjuna was extremely terrified on seeing the very fierce form of the Lord. How then did he sing the praises of the Lord from this thirty-sixth verse to the forty-sixth verse? The solution is that although Arjuna was terrified on seeing the extremely fierce (terrible) cosmic form of the Lord, yet along with being terrified, he was also rejoicing, as Arjuna says later — 'Seeing this form unseen before, I am delighted, and yet my mind is afflicted with fear' (11.45). This proves that Arjuna was not so terrified that he could not even sing the praises of the Lord.]

'Hrsikesa'— The senses are called 'hrisika', and their 'isa' i.e. lord is Bhagavan. The significance of this address here is that You, residing in the hearts of all, give existence and consciousness to the senses, inner instrument (mind), etc.

'tava prakirtya jagatprahrsyatyanurajyate ca'— Turning away from the world, in order to please You, when devotees sing Your names, attributes, sing the verses of Your pastimes, and narrate and listen to Your stories, the entire world rejoices. The meaning is that while moving towards the world causes burning sensation to all, and creates mutual attachment and aversion, those who turn towards You and perform Your bhajan and kirtan, bring peace to all living beings, and all living beings become pleased, whether they know it or not. For example, when the Lord incarnates, the entire world of moving and non-moving, sentient and insentient, rejoices, i.e., non-moving objects like trees, creepers; moving beings like demigods, humans, rishis, sages, kinnaras, gandharvas, animals, birds; and insentient objects like rivers, lakes — all become pleased. In the same way, the singing of the Lord's name, pastimes, attributes, etc. has an effect on all, and everyone rejoices. When people rejoice by singing the Lord's names and attributes, meaning their minds become absorbed in the Lord, then (because their attitude is directed towards the Lord) they develop attachment and love for the Lord.

'raksamsi bhitani diso dravanti'— All the demons, ghosts, spirits, and fiends flee in terror by the singing of Your names and attributes, and by the reading and narrating of Your pastimes. The names and attributes of the Lord are not the cause of the demons, ghosts, etc., fleeing in fear; rather, their own sins are the cause. Due to their own sins, they cannot bear the glorification of the Lord, who is the most pure among the pure and the most auspicious among the auspicious, and they cannot remain where the glorification takes place. If any of them remains, he is reformed, he gets liberated from that evil birth, and he attains welfare.

'sarve namasyanti ca siddhasanghah'— All the groups of siddhas, saintly mahatmas, and spiritual seekers walking towards the Lord, bow down to You after hearing the singing of Your names, attributes, and Your pastimes. It should be kept in mind that all this scene is in the eternal, divine, supernatural cosmic form of the Lord itself. In that very form, wonderful pastimes are taking place one by one.

'sthane'— All this is appropriate, and it should be so, and it is happening so. The reason is that by walking towards You, there is peace, bliss, and happiness, obstacles are destroyed, and by turning away from You, there is only misery and restlessness. The meaning is that the individual soul (jiva), being Your part, finds happiness by turning towards You, and qualities like peace, forgiveness, and humility manifest in him; and by turning away from You, he suffers — all this is proper. This jiva is between the Supreme Soul (Paramatma) and the world. By nature, he is a direct part of the Paramatma, and he has grasped the part of Prakriti (nature). Now, the more he bends towards nature, the more his desire for accumulation and enjoyment increases. The more he strives for accumulation and enjoyment, the more lack, restlessness, misery, burning sensation, and torment increase in him. But turning away from the world, as the jiva turns towards the Lord, the more he is filled with joy, and his misery is destroyed.

Relationship— The propriety shown by the word 'sthane' in the previous verse is confirmed in the next four verses.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Arjuna said:  'Sthane' means rightly or it is but proper. It is but proper that the whole world of gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Yaksas, Kinnaras, Kimpurusas, etc., who have foregathered with a desire to see the battle, should be delighted with You and love You after beholding You by Your grace.

You are the Lord of all. Rightly after beholding You, the Raksasas flee in fear on all sides, and rightly all the host of Siddhas, namely, the host of Siddhas who are favourable to You, pay their homage to You. The connection with what was said earlier is that all this is as it ought to be.

He further proceeds to explain how all this is right:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sthane etc.  By  high glory : by highly singing  the glory.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sthane, it is proper; -what is that?-that the jagat, world; prahrsyati, becomes delighted; tava prakirtya, by Your praise, by reciting Your greatness and hearing it. This is befitting. This is the idea. Or, the word sthane may be taken as alifying the word 'subject' (understood) : It is proper that the Lord is the subject of joy etc. since the Lord is the Self of all beings and the Friend of all.
So also it (the world) anurajyate, becomes attracted, becomes drawn (by that praise). That also is with regard to a proper subject. This is how it is to be explained.
Further, that the raksamsi, Raksasas; bhitani, stricken with fear; dravanti, run; disah, in all directions-that also is with regard to a proper subject. And that sarve, all; the siddha-sanghah, groups of the Siddhas-Kapila and others; namasyanti, bow down-that also is befitting.
He points out the reason for the Lord's being the object of delight etc.:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
'Sthane' is an indeclinable meaning 'properly' (yuktam), and it is also a word in the locative case. What is intended here and how is it construed? In response, he says 'yaditi'. The connection is made as: 'in the proper subject itself' (vishaye eva) or 'in You who are the object of great respect'. The sense is that there is ellipsis (adhyahara) in the construction. He gives a new meaning of the word 'Hrsikesa' which is appropriate to the context: 'agniti'. Here, by the first 'adi', the sun is grasped; by the second, illumination and sustaining by the rays of Agni etc. as His own hair (kesas) is understood. 'Jagaddharsanadeh' means due to the illumination and sustaining, the delight of the world is caused. How are the rays of the sun etc. the hair of the Lord? In response, he says: 'kesatvam tu'. Because they are controlled by Him and generated from Him, they are figuratively identified as one. What is the proof for this? He says: 'pramanam tu'. In the explanation of this statement, the sentence to be spoken is clarified. And thus, residing in Agni, etc., by His hair-like rays controlled by Him, He illuminates, sustains, and delights the world. From the root 'hrs' (to rejoice) with the suffix 'ki', 'hrsya' means the hair that causes delight. He whose hair causes delight is Hrsikesa. Lest the well-known meaning be abandoned, he says: 'hrsikanam' (of the senses). But how is the Lord of the universe specifically the Lord of the senses? He says: 'tesam'. The meaning is: because He is the prompter of the powers of knowledge and action appropriate for human goals. How does the word 'hrsika' denote the senses? He says: 'na' (from the usage: 'my senses do not fall into the wrong path'). The word 'ca' (and) serves to support the explanation of the connection made earlier. He gives proof for the first meaning: 'itaro'rthah'. Fire also. Illuminating and sustaining the world, they arise separately at their own time, and by the actions of the Sun. Here also, as before, the cause-and-effect relationship in illumination, etc., should be understood. The reason is also stated for His lordship.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
In the eleven verses starting with 'sthane', Phalguna (Arjuna) offers his prayers. He prays to the Lord who is endowed with the six attributes (bhagas) and three qualities/forms, and who is beyond the gunas (attributes). In 'sthane', he prays along with Your praise (prakirtya). 'Sthane' is an indeclinable meaning 'appropriate' (yuktam). The entire world is attracted and rejoices by Your praise. He indicates, 'But now I am afraid.' This verse is famous in the Raksoghna-mantra-shastra (scripture of demon-destroying mantras).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Arjuna spoke in eleven verses starting with 'sthane'. 'Sthane' is an indeclinable meaning 'proper' (yuktam). O Hrsikesa, the prompter of all senses, since You possess such extremely wonderful power and are affectionate to Your devotees, therefore, by Your praise (prakirtya), i.e., by the singing and hearing of Your supremacy, not only do I rejoice, but the entire conscious world which is opposed to demons rejoices, i.e., obtains supreme delight; this is indeed proper (sthane). Likewise, that the entire world is attracted, i.e., feels love towards You, that also is proper. Likewise, that the Raksasas, stricken with fear, run in all directions, that also is proper. Likewise, that all the groups of Siddhas like Kapila and others bow down, that also is proper. The connection of 'tava prakirtya' and 'sthane' is with all these statements. This verse is famous in Mantra-shastra as the Raksogna (demon-destroying) mantra.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Arjuna's speech is in eleven verses starting with 'sthane'. 'Sthane' is an indeclinable meaning 'proper' (yuktam). O Hrsikesa, since You possess such wonderful power and are affectionate to Your devotees, therefore, by Your praise (prakirtya), i.e., by the singing of Your majesty, not only do I rejoice, but the entire world rejoices, i.e., obtains supreme delight; this indeed is proper (sthane). Likewise, that the world is attracted, i.e., feels love; and that the Raksasas, being terrified, flee in all directions; and that all the groups of those perfected through yoga, penance, mantras, etc., bow down, all this also is indeed proper. The meaning is that it is not surprising.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
O Hrsikesa, that the world obtains delight and love by the singing of Your glory, that is 'sthane', meaning indeed proper. Or, that the world rejoices and is attracted by Your praise, that 'sthane' means in the proper subject of delight, etc. The address 'Hrsikesa' is used to indicate that You are the controller of all senses, the inner controller of all, and the friend of all. Moreover, that the Raksasas, stricken with fear, run in all directions, and that the groups of Siddhas like Kapila and others bow down, that also is 'sthane' (proper), as explained before.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The verse 'sthane hrsikesa...' is well-known as a mantra used in Sri Vishnu-panjara, etc. In order to reject the understanding of 'sthane' as a physical location (adhikarana), he says 'yuktam' (appropriate). Here, he explains the intended meaning of the word 'jagat' (world) and the cause of its delight, which is rooted in Your praise, by 'yad-etat...'. By 'prahrsyati' (delights), the pleasure of the eyes and mind, as in receiving a beloved guest, is intended. 'Anurajyate' (is attracted/loves) means love like that of a son towards his father, etc., and thus there is no tautology. By 'tvam-avalokya' (beholding You), the cause of the demons' fear is shown. Connecting 'prakirtya' (by praise) to their flight is improper due to contradiction. Assuming the praise is done by others would lead to logical complexity. Beholding, however, has been stated for all, including gods and demons, in 'they behold You' (11.22). The word 'siddha' is used here to indicate the class of favorable beings; hence he says 'siddha-adi-anukula-sangha' (groups of siddhas and other favorable ones).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
To satisfy the desire to know what Arjuna requested, Arjuna's words are stated: 'Arjuna said' in eleven verses starting with 'sthane'. He requests through eleven verses, which represents what is requested by the eleven purified senses. O Hrsikesa, since You are the impeller of all senses, therefore in 'sthane', i.e., in the proper state, by Your praise, i.e., by the singing of Your attributes, the world rejoices, i.e., obtains delight. And 'ca' means furthermore. By hearing the singing, it is attracted, i.e., becomes filled with love. Raising the doubt, 'When there are obstacles present, how is it possible to sing?', he says that the obstacles are destroyed by the singing itself: 'raksamsi'. By Your singing itself, the Raksasas, being terrified, run away, i.e., flee in all directions. Likewise, the groups of Siddhas, i.e., groups of those who have attained knowledge, bow down, i.e., pay obeisance.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Arjuna spoke in eleven verses starting with 'sthane'. O Hrsikesa, the prompter of all senses, the inner ruler, that the world rejoices by Your praise, i.e., the singing of Your name, that is 'sthane', meaning proper. 'Sthane' is an indeclinable meaning 'proper' (yuktam). That the world is attracted by Your praise, that also is proper. That the demons, being terrified by Your praise, run in all directions, i.e., flee, that also is proper. And that all the groups of Siddhas, i.e., the communities of Kapila and others, bow down to You, that also is proper. This verse is famous in Mantra-shastra as the Raksogna (demon-destroying) mantra. The secret is that it is to be known as enclosed (samputita) by the Narayana-ashtakshara and Sudarshana-astra mantras.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Arjuna said: O master of the senses, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus everyone becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offer You their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee here and there. All this is rightly done.

 Arjuna, after hearing from Kṛṣṇa about the outcome of the Battle of Kurukṣetra, became enlightened, and as a great devotee and friend of the Supreme Personality of Godhead he said that everything done by Kṛṣṇa is quite fit. Arjuna confirmed that Kṛṣṇa is the maintainer and the object of worship for the devotees and the destroyer of the undesirables. His actions are equally good for all. Arjuna understood herein that when the Battle of Kurukṣetra was being concluded, in outer space there were present many demigods, siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets, and they were observing the fight because Kṛṣṇa was present there. When Arjuna saw the universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, but others, who were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord was praised. Out of their natural fear of the devastating form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they fled. Kṛṣṇa’s treatment of the devotees and the atheists is praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devotee glorifies the Lord because he knows that whatever He does is good for all.