Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sarvadvāreṣu dehe.asminprakāśa upajāyate .
jñānaṃ yadā tadā vidyādvivṛddhaṃ sattvamityuta

Word Meanings:
सर्वद्वारेषु - through every gate
देहे - in the body
अस्मिन् - in this
प्रकाशः - wisdomlight
उपजायते - shines
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
यदा - when
तदा - then
विद्यात् - may be known
विवृद्धम् - predominant
सत्त्वम् - ,Sattva
इति - thus
उत - indeed.

Life Application:
When the light of wisdom shines through all body gates, know that goodness is predominant.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
When the light of knowledge shines through all the gates of this body (i.e. all the senses), then know that Sattva is predominant.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
When through every gate (sense) in this body, the wisdom-light shines, then it may be known that Sattva is predominant.

सर्वद्वारेषु through every gate (sense)? देहे in the body? अस्मिन् in this? प्रकाशः wisdomlight? उपजायते shines? ज्ञानम् knowledge? यदा when? तदा then? विद्यात् (it) may be known? विवृद्धम् (is) predominant? सत्त्वम्,Sattva? इति thus? उत indeed.Commentary When a particular ality becomes predominant? it reveals its distinctive characteristics in man. Just as jasmine scatters its fragrance far and wide? so also knowledge disseminates itself in all directions. Convert Tamas into Rajas and Rajas into Sattva. Now stand firm in Sattva. You will get increase of light? purity? peace and harmony. Sattva will lead you upwards. You will have an upward pull towards the Supreme Light. Sattvic diet? Japa? meditation? study of holy scriptures? living in seclusion? company of holy men? singing His Names and glories? and regulation of breath (Pranayama) will increase Sattva.Introspect. Look within. Watch the Gunas carefully. Be vigilant. Stand as a doorkeeper. Allow only Sattvic thoughts to pass through the door of the mental factory. Check Rajas. Curb Tamas. When Sattva predominates there is unruffled peace of mind? inner harmony? perfect serenity and tranillity. There is clarity or clear vision also. The understanding is not clouded. There is penetrative insight. The door or threshold of intuition is wide open. The senses will not run towards external objects.The senses are the avenues of senseknowledge. They are the gateways of perception for the Self. When light shines in all the gates of the body? such as the eyes? the ears? etc. (in other words when there is the manifestation of the BuddhiVritti of the Antahkarana)? then knowledge arises. You can understand by the mark of knowledge that Sattva is predominant. You can also know that Sattva is increasing by the mark of happiness. Just as the aspirant knows that Sattva is predominant in him by the marks of knowledge and happiness? so also he knows by the mark of knowledge that Rajas and Tamas are gradually decreasing.The ears shun whatever is improper to be heard. The eyes abandon what they should not look at. The tongue avoids to speak anything that is not right to speak of. The mind is not attracted by the sensual objects. Purity thus increases gradually by Japa? meditation? and selfrestraint. If there is increase of Sattva or harmony? there is also increase of knowledge. Sattva is the only sure means for the attainment of the knowledge of the Self. It lays the foundation of knowledge.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
When the light of knowledge gleams forth from all the gates of the body, then be sure that Purity prevails.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
First, the symptoms that arise when Sattva increases are indicated here. In the next two verses, the increased state of Rajas and Tamas is described respectively. 'When illumination arises through all the gates of this body' — we gain knowledge of the external world through the five sense organs. The physical locations of these senses in the gross body are called 'Golakas'. Through these senses, the light of Consciousness, as it were, goes out to illumine various objects of the world. Thus, through our senses like ear, eye, etc., we illumine objects such as sound, form, etc., that is, we perceive them. Thus, from the seven portals located in the head region, seven flames of the Fire of Knowledge (Self) burst forth, each flame illumining a specific object. When in this state we get true perception of objects, Sattva should be understood to have increased. If at that time Rajas and Tamas increase, our correct perception of objects is obstructed. If the mind is agitated by Rajas and the intellect is veiled by Tamas, it becomes difficult for us to acquire even ordinary worldly knowledge. Therefore, the lesser the degree of these two qualities, the greater will be our intellectual capacity to observe, analyze, and comprehend. It has been mentioned earlier that the Self, which is Consciousness, reflects upon the intellect and through the light of the intellect illumines external objects and internal mental modes. It does not illumine them directly. Sunlight also illumines a room only after being reflected by walls. It is a well-known fact that when the reflecting medium is clean and steady, the image is clear; otherwise not. Distractions caused by Rajas bring instability to the intellect, while the veil caused by Tamas brings impurity. Therefore, when these two predominate, it is natural for the light of intellect to become dull. Thus, the Lord's statement is purely scientific that when there is true perception of objects, Sattva is predominant in the inner equipment. The symptom of increased Rajas is given next:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
When the knowledge-light arises in all the gates in this body, then one should also know that the Sattva has increased predominantly.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
When knowledge as light illumines from all gateways (i.e., the senses), then, one should know that Sattva prevails.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
When the illumination that is knowledge radiates in this body through all the doors (of the senses), then one should know that sattva has increased greatly.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains: He shows the expectation of the next three verses—'yada iti'. To show the sign of the manifestation of Sattva, he introduces the next verse—'ucyate iti'. The locative case in 'sarvadvaresu' etc. should be taken in the sense of cause/instrument. The word 'uta' is a synonym of 'api' (also/even) and is used for emphasis.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
When in all the gates (senses and inner equipment) of this human body, illumination (purity/clarity) and knowledge (discernment/viveka) manifest, then it should be known that Sattva is increased.

Commentary — 'sarvadvāreṣu dehe'smin ... jñānaṃ yadā': At the time when Sattva increases by subduing the Rajasic and Tamasic tendencies, transparency and purity manifest in all the senses and in the inner equipment. Just as in sunlight all objects are clearly seen, so also with a clean outer and inner equipment, true knowledge of the five sense-objects (sound, touch, form, taste, smell) arises. Through the mind, proper contemplation of any subject takes place.

Due to clarity and purity in the senses and inner equipment, a clear knowledge (discernment) arises regarding 'What is real and what is unreal? What is duty and what is non-duty? Where is gain and where is loss? What is beneficial and what is harmful?'

Here, the purpose of saying 'dehe'smin' (in this body) is that the opportunity for Sattva to increase—that is, for clarity, purity, and the power of discernment to manifest in the outer and inner equipment—exists only in this human body, not in other bodies. The Lord has used the term 'sarvadehinām' (14.8) for those bound by Tamoguna, which implies that Rajas and Tamas increase in other bodies as well, but Sattva can increase only in the human body. Therefore, man should conquer Rajas and Tamas and rise above Sattva as well. In this lies the success of human life. The Lord graciously gave the human body and granted full opportunity, authority, eligibility, capability, and freedom to conquer these three qualities.

'tadā vidyāt vivṛddhaṃ sattvamityuta' — Upon the arrival of clarity and discernment in the senses and inner equipment, the seeker should know that currently the modes of Sattva have increased and the modes of Rajas and Tamas are subdued. Therefore, a seeker should never be proud thinking 'I have become knowledgeable, I have become wise'; that is, he should not consider the illumination and knowledge of Sattva as his own quality, but rather as the effect and characteristic of Sattva itself.

Here the words 'iti vidyāt' imply that the arising, increasing of the modes of the three qualities, and the subduing of two qualities upon the predominance of one quality, all these changes occur only in the qualities, not in the true Self (Swarupa)—this fact can be properly understood only in the human body. But man, instead of giving importance to the discernment given by God, connects himself with the qualities and considers himself Sattvic, Rajasic, or Tamasic. Man should not consider himself as such, but know himself to be entirely changeless and unmodified.

That the modes of the three qualities arise and perish separately is experienced by everyone. The Self is changeless and the witness of all these modes. If the Self were also subject to change, who would witness the arising and perishing of these modes? Only the changeless can know change.

When, due to the increase of Sattvic modes, clarity and purity arise in the senses and inner equipment and discernment awakens, attachment to the world vanishes and dispassion arises. Restlessness ceases and peace prevails. Greed disappears and generosity appears. Actions begin to take place unselfishly (Gita 18.9). New actions for enjoyment and accumulation are not initiated. Desire for objects and enjoyments does not arise in the mind, but rather the perspective remains limited to mere maintenance. Intellect develops to comprehend every subject. Every action is carried out carefully and properly. Errors in work are minimized. Even if an error occurs, it is corrected without negligence. Discernment between real-unreal and duty-non-duty remains clearly active. Therefore, at the time when Sattvic modes are increased, the seeker should especially engage in worship, meditation, etc. Even a small effort made at such a time can yield immense benefit quickly.

Relationship: What are the symptoms of increased Rajas? The Lord explains this in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
When the light of knowledge shines revealing the truth of things emerging through all the gateways of knowledge such as the eyes etc., in the body, one should know that Sattva is prevailing.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 14.11–14.13 jointly): Sarva-etc.  upto kurunandana. In all the gates : in all the sense-organs. Greed etc., are born in succession when  the Rajas dominates.  Similarly, absence of mental illumination and so on arise in succession only at the time of the increase of the Tamas.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yada, when; prakasah, the illumination-prakasa, illumination, is a function of the internal organ, intelligence; that itself is jnanam, knowledge; when this illumination called knowledge upajayate, radiates; asmin, in this; dehe, body; sarva-dvaresu, through all the doors-all the sense organs, (viz) ear etc., are the Self's doors of perception; through all those doors; tada, then; through this indication, viz the illumination that is knowledge, vidyat, one should know; iti, that; sattva has vivrddham, increased; uta, greatly [See A.G.-Tr.].
This is the characteristics of rajas when it has become prominent:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains: He says 'sarvadvaresu' etc., indicating that this (increase of Sattva) should be known by experiencing its effects. In this body, which is the abode of enjoyment, when illumination in the form of knowledge of sound, etc., arises in the ear and other senses, and there is knowledge and happiness, then one should know that Sattva is increased. The word 'uta' is in the sense of 'and', meaning that one should know it here by this sign.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains: Now in three verses he speaks of the signs of those qualities when they become dominant. In this body, which is the abode of enjoyment for the Self, through all the doors (the sense organs like ears etc., which are instruments of perception), when illumination—that specific modification of the intellect taking the form of objects, opposing the veil over its objects like a lamp—arises as knowledge regarding objects like sound etc., then by this sign of illumination called knowledge of sound etc., one should know that Sattva, which is of the nature of light, has increased (become predominant). The word 'uta' means 'also', implying that one should know it by the signs of happiness, etc., as well.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains: Now in three verses he states the signs of Sattva and other qualities when they are increased—'sarvadvaresu' etc. In this body, the abode of enjoyment for the Self, when illumination in the form of knowledge of sound and other objects arises in all the gates like the ears etc., then by this sign of illumination one should know that Sattva is increased. By the word 'uta', it is stated that one should also know it by the signs of happiness, etc.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains: Anticipating the question as to what is the sign when a particular quality becomes dominant, he speaks 'sarvadvaresu' etc. All the doors of perception for the Self are the instruments like ears etc. When they act as instruments, in this body, the modification of the internal organ (intellect) is illumination, which itself is knowledge. When such illumination known as the perception of objects like sound arises, then by the sign of the illumination of knowledge, one should know that Sattva has increased (become predominant). The word 'uta' which means 'also' is meant to include signs like happiness, etc.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains: Introducing the three verses beginning with 'sarvadvaresu', he addresses how those qualities, once known, should be treated/remedied. Here, the word 'dvara' (gate) does not refer to the nine gates of the body, nor does it refer to all eleven senses, because all of them do not connect directly with knowledge. Therefore, it refers to the group of five sense organs of knowledge with the mind as the sixth, which serve as gateways for the flow of Consciousness; hence he says 'through the gateways of knowledge like the eyes etc.' The word 'prakasa' here is not in the nominative case to avoid tautology with 'jnana', as explaining 'prakasa' as 'jnana' (as done by Shankara) is considered forced/cumbersome. If taken in the locative case, the syntax fits naturally—either as subject to the suitability of activity resulting from knowledge, or as referring to the true nature of the objects to be illumined, or taking 'jnana' as the mental function. Hence he states: 'knowledge arises in revealing the true nature of things'. By this, those who hold that 'prakasa is like physical light and jnana is like the eye' are refuted. The specification 'in this body' (asmin dehe) is used to indicate that even for a single yogi (like Saubhari) who assumes multiple bodies simultaneously, the increase of different qualities can vary body by body, and to avoid universal application like the great dissolution; thus he says: 'then in that body, Sattva is increased'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains: Now, to the question 'How is the arising of a quality by subduing another to be known?', he speaks 'sarvadvaresu' etc. In this body, which is the instrument of spiritual practice, through all the doors (senses like ears, etc.), when illumination (vision) or knowledge arises in relation to the Supreme Lord, then one should know that Sattva is increased, particularly increased in relation to the Lord. The meaning is: through the ears, hearing the divine stories of the Lord; through speech, chanting His glories; accepting His Prasada; through the nose, smelling the offered flowers/incense, and so on everywhere.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains: In three verses he states the signs of the manifestation of the respective qualities—'sarva' etc. In this body, when in all the doors (external and internal instruments which are means of perceiving external and internal objects), illumination—a specific modification opposing the veil over their respective objects—arises, and through that, knowledge (the illumination of objects like sound in their true nature) arises, then one should know that Sattva is increased. By the word 'uta' (also), it means that one should know it by the signs of happiness, etc., as well.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The manifestation of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all the gates of the body are illuminated by knowledge.

 There are nine gates in the body: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the mouth, the genitals and the anus. When every gate is illuminated by the symptoms of goodness, it should be understood that one has developed the mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, one can see things in the right position, one can hear things in the right position, and one can taste things in the right position. One becomes cleansed inside and outside. In every gate there is development of the symptoms of happiness, and that is the position of goodness.