Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
ye tu dharmyāmṛtamidaṃ yathoktaṃ paryupāsate .
śraddadhānā matparamā bhaktāste.atīva me priyāḥ

Word Meanings:
ये - who
तु - indeed
धर्म्यामृतम् - immortal Dharma
इदम् - this
यथोक्तम् - as declared
पर्युपासते - follow
श्रद्दधानाः - endowed with faith
मत्परमाः - regarding Me as their
भक्ताः - devotees
ते - they
अतीव - exceedingly
मे - to Me
प्रियाः - dear.

Life Application:
Follow this immortal wisdom with faith, making God your supreme goal—become exceedingly dear to the Divine.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Those devotees who, endowed with faith, holding Me as the supreme goal, follow this nectar of Dharma as taught above (i.e. lead a righteous life), are exceedingly dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
They verily who follow this immortal Dharma (law or doctrine) as described above, endowed with faith, regarding Me as their supreme goal, they, the devotees, are exceedingly dear to Me.

ये who? तु indeed? धर्म्यामृतम् immortal Dharma (Law)? इदम् this? यथोक्तम् as declared (above)? पर्युपासते follow? श्रद्दधानाः endowed with faith? मत्परमाः regarding Me as their Supreme? भक्ताः devotees? ते they? अतीव exceedingly? मे to Me? प्रियाः dear.Commentary The Blessed Lord has in this verse given a description of His excellent devotee.Amrita Dharma Amrita is the lifegiving nectar. Dharma is righteousness or wisdom. Dharma is that which leads to immortality when practised. The real devotees regard Me as their final or supreme refuge.Above Beginning with verse 13.A great truth that should not go unnoticed is that the devotee? the man of wisdom and the Yogi have all the same fundamental characteristics.Priyo hi Jnaninotyartham (I am exceedingly dear to the wise man) (VII.12) has thus been explained at length and concluded here thus? Te ativa me priyah (they are exceedinlgy dear to Me).He who follows this immortal Dharma as described above becomes exceedingly dear to the Lord. Therefore? every aspirant who thirsts for salvation? and who longs to attain the Supreme Abode of the Lord should follow this immortal Dharma with zeal and intense faith.Thus in the Upanishads of the glorious Bhagavad Gita? the science of the Eternal? the scripture of Yoga? the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna? ends the twelfth discourse entitledThe Yoga of Devotion.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Verily those who love the spiritual wisdom as I have taught, whose faith never fails, and who concentrate their whole nature on Me, they indeed are My most beloved."

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Nectar-like Dharma As Declared: In the above verses, the essence of Sanatana Dharma is given. Actually, the goal of life for followers of Hinduism is to realize the Self and live that life at all levels of their personality—physical, mental, and intellectual. For this, it is not enough that one understands this knowledge at an intellectual level, or regularly recites the scriptures, or can explain them well to others. One must assimilate this scriptural knowledge and become a perfect person himself. Therefore, the Lord says that he must be endowed with faith. Here the word 'faith' (Shraddha) means the ability to assimilate the Self-knowledge expounded by the scriptures through one's own experience.

Those devotees are exceedingly dear to Me: With this verse, the sixth part of this section describing the characteristics of a devotee and this chapter also end. Although no new characteristic is mentioned here, there is a reassurance given by the Lord to all seekers that seekers endowed with these qualities will attain Supreme Devotion.

Conclusion: 'Tat Sat'—Thus in the Upanishads of the glorious Bhagavad Gita, the science of the Eternal, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, ends the twelfth discourse entitled 'The Yoga of Devotion'.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Those, who resort, as instructed above, to this duty [conducive to]  immortality, who have faith [in it] and have Me alone their goal - those devotees are exceedingly dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
But those devotees who follow this nectar of virtuous-duty as taught above, who are full of faith and who regard Me as the Supreme - they are exceedingly dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
But [Tu (but) is used to distinguish those who have attained the highest Goal from the aspirants.-Tr.] those devotees who accept Me as the supreme Goal, and with faith seek for this ambrosia [M.S.'s reading is dharmamrtam-nectar in the form of virtue. Virtue is called nectar because it leads to Immortality, or because it is sweet like nectar.] which is indistinguishable from the virtues as stated above, they are very dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
He summarizes and concludes: 'Ye tu dharmyāmṛtam'. Dharma is Vishnu, and that which relates to Him is 'dharmyam'. Being both 'dharmya' (virtuous/related to Dharma) and 'amrita' (nectar/destroyer of the cycle of birth and death), it is called 'dharmyāmṛtam'. 'Śrat' means faith (belief in scriptures/existence of God); according to lexicons, the word 'Śrat' denotes 'āstikya' (faith/devotion). Those who possess this faith are 'śraddadhānāḥ'.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
After reiterating the group of virtues beginning with 'adveṣṭā' (non-hatred) which were described as characteristics of the wise man (jñānī), he introduces the concluding verse. He states the meaning of the fourth line by referencing 'priyo hi' (VII.17: 'For I am exceedingly dear to the wise'). He summarizes the meaning of the verse starting with 'Yasmāt' (since), implying that although these virtues are natural to a realized soul, they must be diligently practiced by seekers as a means to acquire knowledge. Thus, through the maturation of meditation on Brahman with attributes, the fit aspirant contemplates the attributeless Brahman, and by practicing hearing (śravaṇa), reflection, and meditation while being endowed with virtues like non-hatred to all beings, realizes the Truth. This realization leads to liberation. Hence, it is established that the meaning of the word 'Tat' (That), which is the object of the understanding of the great Upanishadic sentence causing liberation, must be contemplated. Thus ends the twelfth chapter in the commentary of Sri Anandagiri.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Those devotees who are endowed with faith in Me, and are devoted to Me, and follow this nectar of Dharma as stated above, are exceedingly dear to Me.

Commentary: ye tu — Here, by the word 'ye' (those), the Lord has indicated those seeking devotees (sadhakas) about whom Arjuna asked in the first verse using the word 'ye'. In reply to that question, in the second verse, the Lord declared the seekers of the qualified Form (saguna) as the most united (yuktatamah) in His view (using the words 'ye' and 'te'). Then He taught the means of that saguna worship, and after describing the characteristics of perfected devotees (siddha bhaktas), He now concludes the topic. Here the word 'ye' is used for those extremely faithful devotees devoted to the Lord, who practice by keeping the characteristics of perfected devotees as their ideal. The word 'tu' (but/indeed) is used to separate the topics. Here, the word 'tu' is used to distinguish the topic of seeking devotees from that of perfected devotees. From this word, it appears that seeking devotees are especially dear to the Lord even more than the perfected ones.

sraddadhanah — Since God-realization has been achieved, the question of faith does not arise in the characteristics of perfected devotees, because faith is required only as long as the eternally-attained Lord is not experienced. Therefore, this word should be understood as indicating the faithful seeking devotees. Such faithful devotees try to assimilate the Lord's nectar-like righteous teaching (which the Lord spoke from the 13th to the 19th verse) into themselves for the purpose of attaining God. Although faith and love are important in the practice of devotion, and discrimination (viveka) is important in the path of knowledge, it should not be assumed that discrimination has no value in devotion or faith has no value in knowledge. Indeed, faith and discrimination are highly necessary in all paths. Having discrimination accelerates the practice of devotion. Similarly, it is only through faith in the scriptures and the Supreme Truth that the path of knowledge can be followed. Therefore, faith and discrimination are helpful in both devotion and knowledge.

matparamah — Seeking devotees have immense reverence for perfected devotees. They consider the qualities of perfected devotees as supreme. Therefore, keeping those qualities as their ideal, they become devoted to the Lord in order to follow them with respect. In this way, by contemplating the Lord and depending only on Him, all those qualities manifest in them automatically. The Lord specially spoke of being devoted to Him in chapter 11 verse 55 using the term 'matparamaḥ', and in chapter 12 verse 6 using 'matparāḥ', and finally in this verse He has reiterated the same as 'matparamāḥ'. This proves that devotion to God (bhagavat-parayanata) is primary in Bhakti Yoga. By being devoted to God, spiritual practice happens automatically by His grace and obstacles (asadhanas) are destroyed.

dharmyamrtam idam yathoktam — The five sections describing the thirty-nine characteristics of perfected devotees are filled with Dharma (righteousness). There is not even a trace of unrighteousness in them. A practice in which there is absolutely no element contrary to the practice is like nectar (amrita). Since the previously mentioned group of characteristics is filled with Dharma and has nothing contrary to the practice, it has been designated as 'dharmyāmṛtam' (nectar of Dharma). Even when there is nothing contrary in the practice, following this nectar of Dharma exactly as declared is possible only when the seeker's goal is solely God-realization, without the slightest desire for wealth, prestige, praise, respect, accumulation, or sensory enjoyment. In each section, all characteristics are nectar of Dharma. Therefore, whichever section of characteristics the seeker takes as an ideal for practice, that itself is the nectar of Dharma for him.

The characteristics of the nectar of Dharma such as 'adveṣṭā sarvabhūtānāṃ maitraḥ...' (non-enmity to all beings, friendly...) exist partially in every seeker, along with some bad qualities and conduct. In every being, both virtues and vices exist; yet vices can be completely abandoned, whereas virtues cannot be completely abandoned. The reason is that while the degrees of virtues may vary in a perfected soul according to his practice and nature, there is not even a minor vice representing a lack of virtue. Because of the variation in the intensity of virtues, they have been divided into five categories, but since vices are completely abandonable, they cannot be categorized.

A seeker keeps good company (satsanga), but at the same time bad company (kusanga) also happens. He practices self-control, but lack of control also occurs. He practices spiritual discipline, but undisciplined behavior also takes place. As long as undisciplined behavior remains alongside practice, or vices remain alongside virtues, the seeker's practice is not complete. This is because discipline alongside indiscipline, or virtues alongside vices, can also be found in non-seekers. Moreover, as long as indiscipline remains with discipline, or vices with virtues, the seeker feels pride in his practice or qualities, which is the foundation of demoniac nature (asuri sampatti). Therefore, it is said that one should follow this nectar of Dharma exactly as declared. The implication is that it should be practiced exactly as described. If defects (indiscipline) also remain while following this nectar of Dharma, then God-realization will not happen. Therefore, the seeker must be extremely vigilant in this regard. If due to some reason a defect-ridden tendency arises partially in the practice, instead of ignoring it, one should diligently try to remove it. If it does not go away despite efforts, one should pray to the Lord with intense yearning.

All good qualities, good conduct, and good feelings exist only due to relationship with the Real (Satsanga / Paramatma). Similarly, all bad qualities, bad conduct, and bad feelings arise due to connection with the unreal (asat). Even in the worst of men, there is never a complete absence of good qualities and good conduct, because as an amsa (part) of the Real (Paramatma), every living being has an eternally established relationship with the Real. Due to this relationship with God, good qualities and conduct will exist in them in some measure. Upon realizing God, the relationship with the unreal is completely severed, and all bad qualities, conduct, and feelings are destroyed forever. Good qualities, good conduct, and good feelings are God's property (daivi sampatti). Therefore, the more a seeker turns towards God or becomes devoted to Him, the more these good qualities, conduct, and feelings will manifest automatically, and bad qualities, conduct, and feelings will be destroyed.

Lust and anger, joy and grief, desire and wrath, etc., are modifications (vikaras) of the inner organ (antahkarana), not its inherent nature or attributes (dharma) (Gita 13.6). There is an eternal relationship between the possessor of an attribute (dharmi) and the attribute (dharma). For example, there is an eternal relationship between the sun (dharmi) and its heat (dharma), which can never be eliminated. Thus, the attribute cannot exist without the possessor, nor the possessor without the attribute. Modifications like lust and anger do not remain all the time even in an ordinary person; they decrease in a seeker and are completely absent in a perfected soul. If these modifications were the inherent nature (dharma) of the inner organ, they would remain constant at all times and would never be destroyed as long as the inner organ (dharmi) exists. Therefore, these are not the dharmas of the inner organ, but rather transient (coming and going) modifications. As the seeker moves towards his sole goal, God, these modifications of likes and dislikes gradually fade, and upon realizing God, they disappear completely.

In the Gita, the Lord has at various places told the seekers to completely abandon these modifications of likes and dislikes, using phrases like 'tayor na vaśam āgacchet' (3.34), 'rāga-dveṣa-viyuktaiḥ' (2.64), and 'rāga-dveṣau vyudasya' (18.51). If these modifications of attraction and aversion were the inherent nature of the inner organ, then their abandonment would be impossible as long as the inner organ existed; and how could the Lord command us to make the impossible possible? In the Gita, perfected great souls are described as completely free from attraction and aversion. For instance, in this very chapter, from verse 13 to 19, the Lord has shown the perfected devotees as completely free from attraction and aversion. This also proves that these are only modifications, not the inherent nature of the inner organ. By completely turning away from the unreal, not even a trace of these modifications remains in those perfected great souls. If these modifications persisted in the inner organ, then from what would they be liberated? The Lord has addressed those characteristics of the inner organ of a perfected soul, in which there is not a trace of these modifications, as 'dharmyāmṛtam' (nectar of Dharma), and urged seekers to follow them as an ideal for attaining God.

paryupasate — In the eyes of seeking devotees, the Lord's beloved perfected devotees are highly revered. Due to a natural attraction towards God, divine qualities (which belong to God) come to them naturally. Nevertheless, seekers have a natural respect for the virtues of those perfected great souls and try to imbibe those qualities in themselves. Imbibing and adopting those qualities is what is meant by the seeking devotees 'worshipping/following' (serving) those virtues well. The word 'paryupāsate' has been used here in the sense of faithfully and thoroughly practicing the nectar of Dharma exactly as described in the seven verses from the 13th to the 19th of this chapter. Practicing thoroughly means that the seeker must not have even the slightest vice. For example, even if a seeker does not have full compassion for all beings, he must have absolutely no cruelty towards any being. Seekers do not possess these characteristics completely in all parts, which is why they are told to practice them. When the characteristics become complete in all aspects, they fall into the category of perfected souls. When there is intense longing and anxiety for God-realization in a seeker, his vices are automatically destroyed because longing and anxiety consume all vices, and practice also happens naturally. Because of this, he attains God-realization quickly and easily.

bhaktas te'tiva me priyah — The word 'bhaktāḥ' is used here for the seekers dependent on God walking on the path of devotion. In chapter 11 verse 53, the Lord stated the rarity of His vision through study of Vedas, penance, charity, sacrifices, etc., and in verse 54 described the ease of His vision through unalloyed devotion. Then in verse 55, He described the nature of unalloyed devotion through the characteristics of His devotee. On this, in the first verse of this (12th) chapter, Arjuna asked who is superior between the worshippers of the qualified-with-form (saguna-sakara) and the unqualified-formless (nirguna-nirakara). In answer to this question in the second verse, the Lord declared those seekers (worshipping the qualified form) superior who worship Him with supreme faith, fixing their minds on Him. Here in the conclusion, the word 'bhaktāḥ' has been used for those very seekers. The Lord calls those seeking devotees His exceedingly beloved. There are three reasons for describing perfected devotees as dear and seeking devotees as exceedingly dear: (1) Perfected devotees have already realized the Truth, i.e., attained God, but seeking devotees, even without attaining God, are faithfully devoted to Him. Therefore, they are exceedingly dear to Him. (2) A perfected devotee is like the Lord's grown-up son: 'The wise one is like My grown-up son.' But a seeking devotee is like the Lord's small, innocent child: 'The humble servant is like My young child' (Ramacharitamanas 3.43.4). A small child is naturally dear to everyone. Hence, the seeking devotee is also exceedingly dear to the Lord. (3) The Lord considers Himself free from debt by giving His direct vision to the perfected devotee, but the seeking devotee (even without having direct vision) worships Him with simple faith, depending solely on Him. Therefore, because He has not yet given them His direct vision, the Lord considers Himself indebted to them, and thus calls them His exceedingly dear.

Thus, with the utterance of the divine names of Tat, Sat, ends the twelfth chapter entitled Bhakti Yoga in the glorious Upanishad of the Bhagavad Gita, the science of the Eternal, the scripture of Yoga, in the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
But those who follow Bhakti Yoga - 'which is a nectar of virtuous duty,' i.e., which is at once virtuous duty and nectar, and which even as a menas, is eal to its end in conferring bliss on those who follow is as stated above, i.e., in the manner taught in the stanza beginning with 'Those who, focusing their minds on Me' (12.2) - such devotees are exceedingly dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Yasmat  etc. upto  Me priyah.   One who has no fixed thought :  One who has no resolution,  [in his mundane life] like  'This alone must be done by me'.  He, who enjoys, with contentment, both pleasure and pain as they come, and has his mind completely absorbed in Supreme Lord - that person happily (or easily)  attains the Supreme Isolation (Emancipation)

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tu, but; ye bhaktah, those devotees of Mine, the monks who have resorted to the highest devotion consisting in the knowledge of the supreme Reality; mat-paramah, who accept Me as the supreme Goal, to whom I, as mentioned above, who am identical with the Immutable, am the highest (parama), unsurpassable Goal; and sraddadhanah, with faith; paryupasate, seek for, practise; idam, this; dharmyamrtam, ambrosia that is indistinguishable from the virtues-that which is indistinguishable from dharma (virtue) is dharmya, and this is called amrta (ambrosia) since it leads to Immortality-; yatha-uktam, as stated above in, 'He who is not hateful towards any creature,' etc.; te, they; are ativa, very; priyah, dear; me, to Me.
After having explained what was hinted in, 'For I am very much dear to the man of Knowledge৷৷.'(7.17), that has been concluded here in, 'Those devotees are very dear to Me.'
Since by seeking for this ambrosia which is indistinguishable from the virtues as stated above one becomes very dear to Me, who am theLord Vishnu, the supreme God, therefore this nectar which is indistinguishable from the virtues has to be diligently sought for by one who is a seeker of Liberation, who wants to attain the coveted Abode of Visnu. This is the purport of the sentence. [Thus, after the consummation of meditation on the alified Brahman, one who aspires after the unalified Brahman, who has the alifications mentioned in, 'He who is not hateful towards any creature,' etc., who is pre-eminently fit for this purpose, and who practises sravana etc. has the possibility of realizing the Truth from which his Liberation logically follows. Hence, the conclusion is that the meaning of the word tat (in the sentence tattvamasi) has to be sought for, since his has the power to arouse the comprehension of the meaning of that sentence, which is the means to Liberation.]

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
To answer the question of why 'ye tu' is restated here, he says: 'piṇḍīkṛtya' (to summarize collectively). In order to explain the term 'dharmyāmṛtam' whose meaning is not obvious, he first explains the word 'dharma'. 'Dharmyam' means that which is not separate from Dharma (virtue/duty), because it is an auxiliary part of His worship; and Dharma is Vishnu Himself. It is not the unseen fruits (adṛṣṭa) for an active worldly person because that is impossible, but it is the means of liberation for a renounced person (nivṛtta). Now, explaining the word 'amṛta', he states that 'dharmyāmṛtam' is a Karmadhāraya compound. That which is not dead (mṛta) is 'amṛta' (immortal); here, the negative prefix 'na' indicates the opposite meaning, and the word 'amṛta' is indicative of liberation. He derives the word 'śraddadhānāḥ' from 'śrat'. Even though 'śrat' is enumerated as an upasarga (prefix), its usage as a noun denoting truth or existence (sattva) is not contradictory, since its classification as a prefix is for specific grammatical operations.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Thus, establishing that the devotee established in the path of devotion by grace (Puṣṭi-Bhakti-Yoga) is exceedingly dearer than the one established in the imperishable Self (Akṣara-Brahman) in the path of rules (Maryādā), He concludes with 'ye tu'. Those divine souls (daiva-jīvas) who faithfully and properly follow this nectar, which is not separate from the dharma of service (sevā-dharma), taking shelter in Me, those devotees are exceedingly dear to Me. Let it be so—this is the import. As written in the verse: 'In the path of worship of the unmanifest, there is misery even in the path of rules (Maryādā); whereas in the path of Krishna-devotion, happiness is experienced through grace (Puṣṭi), as has been well declared.'

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
By the verses starting with 'adveṣṭā' (non-hatred), the natural qualities characterizing sannyāsīs who worship the Imperishable have been described. As stated in the Vārttika: 'For one who has attained Self-realization, qualities like non-hatred, etc., manifest effortlessly, and not as a means of discipline (sādhana).' The same group of qualities was described earlier under the characteristics of a person of steady wisdom (sthitaprajña). Showing that this group of virtues, when acquired with effort, becomes the means of liberation for a seeker, He concludes with 'ye tu'. Those sannyāsīs, seekers of liberation, who with effort practice this nectar-like virtue (called 'dharmyāmṛtam' because it leads to immortality or is sweet as nectar), as declared above starting with 'adveṣṭā sarvabhūtānām', being full of faith, holding Me as the Supreme (meaning I, the Lord, the imperishable Self, Vāsudeva, am their highest, unsurpassable Goal), they are My devotees worshipping Me, the attributeless Brahman, and are exceedingly dear to Me. This is the conclusion of what was hinted earlier in VII.17 ('For I am exceedingly dear to the wise man, and he is dear to Me'). The sentence implies: since one who faithfully practices this nectar of virtue becomes exceedingly dear to the Lord Vishnu, the Supreme Lord, therefore, though this is the natural characteristic of a Knower, it must be diligently practiced with effort as a means to Self-knowledge by a seeker desirous of reaching the supreme abode of Vishnu. Thus, in the middle six chapters, it is established that through the maturation of meditation on the qualified Brahman, one who contemplates the attributeless Brahman, endowed with virtues like non-hatred to all, and practicing hearing, reflection, and meditation, attains realization of the Truth of the Vedantic mahāvākyas, leading to liberation; hence the meaning of the word 'Tat' (That) must be investigated. 'A unique state of devotion, superior to the nirvikalpa state of jīvanmukti, was declared by the Unborn Lord; I worship that Lord of Kashi, by whom my foundation has been established in that ocean of bliss.'

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He concludes the described group of virtues along with its fruit: 'ye tu'. The virtues described above as declared (yathoktam) are themselves nectar (amrita) because they are the means of achieving immortality. Some read this as 'dharmyāmṛtam idam'. Those devotees who practice this, being full of faith and holding Me as their supreme goal, are exceedingly dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having expounded the group of virtues starting with 'adveṣṭā' (non-hatred) for the sannyāsīs who worship the Imperishable, who are free from all desires and established in the knowledge of the Supreme Reality, he concludes with 'ye tu'. Those who, endowed with supreme faith, accept Me as their supreme Goal (meaning I, the imperishable Self, am their highest, unsurpassable Goal), and practice this, they are My devotees established in the highest devotion characterized by the knowledge of the Supreme Reality, and they are exceedingly dear to Me, Vāsudeva, the Supreme Self. This concludes what was indicated in VII.17 ('For I am exceedingly dear to the wise man, and he is dear to Me'). The meaning is: since by practicing this nectar of virtue as declared above, one becomes exceedingly dear to Lord Vāsudeva, therefore a seeker of liberation desiring to reach the beloved abode of Lord Vishnu (Vāsudeva) must diligently practice this nectar of virtue. Thus, in the twelfth chapter, by showing that the main eligible seeker—who is endowed with virtues like non-hatred and realizes the Truth through repeated hearing, reflection, etc., while contemplating the attributeless Imperishable through the ripening of meditation on the qualified Brahman—is fit for direct liberation, the nature of the word 'Tat' (both qualified and unqualified) has been demonstrated. [Followed by verses of praise to Lord Krishna/Madhava]. Thus ends the twelfth chapter in the Gita-Bhashya-Utkarsha-Dipika written by the learned Dhanapati.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
At the beginning of this chapter, in response to Arjuna's query, the superiority of Bhakti Yoga over meditation on the imperishable Self (Akṣara) was established. In case of inability to practice Bhakti Yoga, meditation on the Self (Akṣara Yoga) was taught as an indirect means to Bhakti Yoga, along with the qualities required for it. Now, he explains how the Lord concludes the detailed answer to the initial question. The verse 'mayyāveśya mano ye mām' (12.2) and this concluding verse share the same import. In 12.2, 'nitya-yuktāḥ' corresponds to 'matparamāḥ' here. In 12.2, 'śraddhayā parayopetāḥ' corresponds to 'śraddadhānāḥ' here. In 12.2, 'te me yuktatamā matāḥ' corresponds to its result 'bhaktās te'tīva me priyāḥ' here. Therefore, the same topic is concluded here. The reasons (like the word 'tu', specific adjectives, etc.) for this referring to a different category of seeker (the devotee of the personal Lord) have been explained earlier. By this verse, the conclusion of Bhakti Yoga, which is the principal subject of the middle six chapters, is accomplished. The compound 'dharmyāmṛtam' is shown to be a Karmadhāraya: 'dharmyam ca amṛtam ca' (both virtuous and nectar-like). Since 'dharmya' indicates the means, and 'amṛta' implies that the practice itself is as blissful and enjoyable as the goal, he says 'ye tu prāpyasamam' (those who follow Bhakti Yoga, which is equal to its end). 'Yathoktam' refers to the manner taught in 12.2 ('fixing their minds on Me'), thereby excluding contextual references to Karma Yoga. To distinguish these devotees from others who also possess some devotion, the term 'te bhaktāḥ' is specifically used. For the former, the dear-ness was due to their generosity (udāratva), but for these, it is due to their being His very Self, hence they are 'exceedingly dear' (atīva priyāḥ). As stated in 7.18 ('Noble indeed are all these, but the wise man I deem to be My very Self'). This refutes the view of other commentators who claim that this verse concludes the list of qualities beginning with 'adveṣṭā' (12.13), since a different class of seeker (the devotee of the personal Lord) is clearly intended here. Thus ends the commentary of Sri Venkatanatha (Vedantadesika).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He concludes the described form of devotion: 'ye tu'. By using the general word 'ye' (whoever), it is shown that there is no restriction of caste or social division (varna); rather, whichever fortunate souls, having faith in this previously described imperishable nectar of virtue (dharmyāmṛtam) which is of the nature of the fruit of My grace, knowing My words to be true, and being devoted to Me as their sole refuge, worship and serve Me, those devotees become exceedingly dear to Me, My very Self. This is similar to the statement in the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (9.4.64): 'Without My devotees, I do not desire even My own Self.' As written in the verse: 'Thus, sprinkling Arjuna with the nectar-like words of Bhakti Yoga, and destroying all doubts, Lord Hari remains devoted to the welfare and elevation of the world.'

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He prescribes the characteristics of the liberated soul as practices (sādhana) for the seeker: 'ye tu'. Those seekers of liberation (mumukṣus) who are different from the previously described liberated souls, who completely and without deviation practice this collection of virtues described in the text starting with 'adveṣṭā sarvabhūtānām'—which is called 'dharmāmṛtam' (nectar of virtue) because it is the means of attaining immortality (liberation)—endowed with faith, accepting Me as the supreme Goal (meaning I, the Lord Vāsudeva, called the Imperishable, devoid of all attributes, and of the nature of supreme bliss, am their final attainable Goal), those devotees possessing peace, self-control, etc., and dedicated to My worship, are exceedingly dear to Me. The wise man (jñānī) is indeed the Lord's very Self; by elimination, this exceeding dear-ness culminates in the devotees. The import is that the natural characteristics of the liberated souls must be diligently practiced with effort by the seeker. As stated in the Vārttika: 'For one who has attained Self-realization, qualities like non-hatred, etc., manifest effortlessly, and not as a means of discipline.' Here ends the discrimination of the word 'Tat' which is centered on worship. Hereafter, the inquiry into the meaning of the sentence, establishing the non-difference between the Jīva and Brahman, will begin.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Those who follow this imperishable path of devotional service and who completely engage themselves with faith, making Me the supreme goal, are very, very dear to Me.

 In this chapter, from verse 2 through the end – from mayy āveśya mano ye mām (“fixing the mind on Me”) through ye tu dharmāmṛtam idam (“this religion of eternal engagement”) – the Supreme Lord has explained the processes of transcendental service for approaching Him. Such processes are very dear to the Lord, and He accepts a person engaged in them. The question of who is better – one who is engaged in the path of impersonal Brahman or one who is engaged in the personal service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead – was raised by Arjuna, and the Lord replied to him so explicitly that there is no doubt that devotional service to the Personality of Godhead is the best of all processes of spiritual realization. In other words, in this chapter it is decided that through good association one develops attachment for pure devotional service and thereby accepts a bona fide spiritual master and from him begins to hear and chant and observe the regulative principles of devotional service with faith, attachment and devotion and thus becomes engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord. This path is recommended in this chapter; therefore there is no doubt that devotional service is the only absolute path for self-realization, for the attainment of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The impersonal conception of the Supreme Absolute Truth, as described in this chapter, is recommended only up to the time one surrenders himself for self-realization. In other words, as long as one does not have the chance to associate with a pure devotee, the impersonal conception may be beneficial. In the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth one works without fruitive result, meditates and cultivates knowledge to understand spirit and matter. This is necessary as long as one is not in the association of a pure devotee. Fortunately, if one develops directly a desire to engage in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in pure devotional service, he does not need to undergo step-by-step improvements in spiritual realization. Devotional service, as described in the middle six chapters of Bhagavad-gītā , is more congenial. One need not bother about materials to keep body and soul together, because by the grace of the Lord everything is carried out automatically. Thus end the Bhaktivedanta s to the Twelfth Chapter of the Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā in the matter of Devotional Service.