Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
namaḥ purastādatha pṛṣṭhataste namo.astu te sarvata eva sarva .
anantavīryāmitavikramastvaṃ sarvaṃ samāpnoṣi tato.asi sarvaḥ

Word Meanings:
नमः - salutation
पुरस्तात् - front
अथ - also
पृष्ठतः - behind
ते - to Thee
नमः - salutation
अस्तु - be
ते - to Thee
सर्वतः - on every side
एव - even
सर्व - O all
अनन्तवीर्य - infinite power
अमितविक्रमः - infinite in prowess
त्वम् - Thou
सर्वम् - all
समाप्नोषि - pervadest
ततः - wherefore
असि - art
सर्वः - all.

Life Application:
Offer salutations from the front, from behind, and from every side, honoring infinite power pervading all.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Salutations to You from the front and from behind, O Lord of infinite capability! Salutations to You from all sides, O Self of all! You are possessed of immeasurable valor, and You pervade everything, hence You are all-manifest (of the form of all).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Salutations to Thee, in front and behind! Salutations to Thee on every side! O All!! Thou infinite in power and prowess, pervadest all; wherefore Thou art all.

नमः salutation? पुरस्तात् (from) front? अथ also? पृष्ठतः (from) behind? ते to Thee? नमः salutation? अस्तु be? ते to Thee? सर्वतः on every side? एव even? सर्व O all? अनन्तवीर्य infinite power? अमितविक्रमः infinite in prowess? त्वम् Thou? सर्वम् all? समाप्नोषि pervadest? ततः wherefore? असि (Thou) art? सर्वः all.Commentary The words I prostrate myself before Thee? behind Thee and on every side indicate the allpervading nature of the Lord. How can the allpervading Self have front and back Finite objects only have front and back sides Arjuna imagined that there were front and back sides to the Lord and so prostrated himself in his extreme faith and devotion.O All Nothing exists without Thee. As the Self is allpervading? He is called the All. There is nothing except the Self.On every side? as Thou art present everywhere or in all arters.One may be powerful but may not possess the courage to kill the enemies or he may be endowed with a mild form of courge but the Lord is infinite in courage and infinite in power.Pervadest by Thy One Self.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Salutations to Thee in front and on every side, Thou who encompasseth me round about. Thy power is infinite; Thy majesty immeasurable; thou upholdest all things; yea,Thou Thyself art All.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The Supreme Self is all-pervading—within and without, above and below, in all directions. There is no place vacant of Him. This is not Arjuna's original idea alone. The great Rishis of the Upanishads lived continuously in this experience. The Supreme Self whom Arjuna prostrates to with his mind in all directions is not only all-pervading like space, but is also the source of all power and prowess. Wherever the inspiration to work or the capacity to achieve success is visible, it is all but a glimpse, a ray of the infinite power and immeasurable prowess of the Supreme Self. The Supreme Self exists everywhere in all objects and beings as the 'Existence-itself' (Sat-svaroopa) because without 'Existence' nothing can exist; therefore, in reality, the Supreme Self alone is of the form of all (all-manifest). Water alone is all the waves, and clay alone is all the pots. Because, due to ignorance of Your greatness, I have previously committed offenses towards You, therefore—

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Salutation to You in the front and behind;  salutation to You, just on all sides, O One Who are All ! You are of infinite might and of immeasurable powers;  and You pervade all and hence You are all.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
(a) Salutation to You from before and behind! Salutation to You from all sides, O All!৷৷.

(b) ৷৷. O You of infinite prowess and heroic action which are measureless! You pervade all beings and therefore are all.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Salutation to You in the East and behind. Salutation be to You on all sides in deed, O All! You are possessed of infinite strength and infinite heroism. You pervade everything; hence You are all!

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Why is it said 'fittingly' (sthane)? That is explained by the words 'kasmad' (why indeed) etc. 'Mahatman' means He who is the complete or full Self (atma). The word 'atma' is defined in the Mahabharata: 'Because He pervades all, accepts all, experiences all objects here, and because of His eternal existence, He is called the Atman.' 'Tat param' means that which is beyond the existent (sat) and non-existent (asat). As said in the Mahabharata: 'The universe which is both existent and non-existent, is beyond the existent and non-existent (meaning the Lord is beyond both).' [M.Bh. 1.1.23]

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Arjuna turns towards the Lord, bowing to Him with praise in another manner, saying 'Likewise' (Tatha). The direction in which the sun rises is called the East. Everything situated in that direction is You alone; therefore he says 'Namah' (Salutations) to You. The word 'atha' (and/then) indicates conjunction. Everything situated behind (West) is also You alone; therefore he says 'and behind' (prishthatah). In short, whatever exists in all directions, all of that without exception is You alone. To You there should be prostration; hence he says, 'namo'stu' (let there be salutations). He indicates the resulting state of Him being the Self of all by addressing Him, 'O All!' (He Sarva). He explains that there is no tautology between the terms 'virya' (might) and 'vikrama' (valor) by 'viryam' etc. Anticipating the doubt of redundancy because a powerful person always exhibits valor, he says 'viryavan' (possessing might). He states the distinction of the Lord from ordinary worldly beings by saying, 'But You...' (Tvam tu). He expands upon the declared state of being the Self of all by 'sarvam' (everything). He rules out the independent existence of the world by saying 'tvaya' (by You).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O All! Salutations to You from the front, and salutations to You from behind! Salutations to You from every side! O Lord of infinite power and immeasurable prowess, You have enveloped everything; therefore, You are everything.

Commentary—'namah purastadatha prishthataste namo'stu te sarvata eva sarva'—Arjuna is terrified. He is unable to comprehend what he should say. Therefore, he is offering salutations and only salutations from the front, from behind, and from all sides, i.e., from all the ten directions. 'anantaviryāmitavikramastvam'—Calling Him 'Anantavirya' (of infinite power) implies that You are infinite in splendor, strength, etc.; and calling Him 'Amitavikrama' (of immeasurable prowess) implies that Your deeds of protection, etc., which are full of prowess, are also limitless. In this way, Your power is infinite and Your prowess is also infinite. 'sarvam samapnoshi tato'si sarvah'—You have enveloped everything, meaning the entire world is within You. There is no part of the world that is not within You. Arjuna is witnessing a great, supernatural, and extraordinary phenomenon: that the Lord is fully pervading and filling infinite universes, and yet all these infinite universes exist within a single fraction of the Lord.

Connection—Now, in the next two verses, Arjuna prays to the Lord and begs for forgiveness.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
You, of infinite prowess and measureless heroic action, pervade all beings as their very Self and therefore, are, in reality all of them. Terms, naming all other entities, are truly naming You; for they, both sentient as well as non-sentient, constitute Your body, and as such are just Your modes. Therefore You alone, having them all as Your modes, are signified by all terms standing for them. In the texts, 'O by You of infinite form, is the cosmos pervaded' (11.38) and 'You pervade all, and hence are all' (11.40), it is clearly stated that the pervasion as the Self is the only rationale for speaking of them as one with You, in the sense of co-ordinate predication as in the text, 'You are the imperishable and also being and non-being' (11.37) and 'You are Vayu, Yama and Agni' (11.39).

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Namo  namah etc.  Salutation and salutation :  This  repetition reveals the intensity of the devotion.  What has been taught by the past chapters by the Bhagavat regarding His own intrinsic nature,  Arjuna - witnessing the same by perception - declares it openly by way of devotional hymn.  Hence, to comment on the hymn would  symply amount to the repetition  [of what has already been said by us].  Hence, let me  (11.Ag.)  abstain [from commenting on it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Namah, salutation to You; purastat, in the East; atha, and; even prsthatah, behind. Salutation be sarvatah, on all sides; eva, indeed; te, to You who exist everywhere; sarva, O All! Tvam, You; are ananta-virya-amita-vikramah, possessed of infinite strength and infinite heroism. virya is strength, and vikramah is heroism. Someone though possessing strength for the use of weapons etc. [Ast. reads 'satru-vadha-visaye, in the matter of killing an enemy'.-Tr.] may lack heroism or have little heroism. But You are possessed of infinite strength and infinite heroism.
Samapnosi, You pervade, interpenetrate; sarvam, everything, the whole Universe, by Your single Self. Tatah, hence; asi, You are; sarvah, All, i.e., no entity exists without You.
'Since I am guilty of not knowing Your greatness, therefore,'-

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Having himself said that 'everyone bows down' (11.36) is fitting, how can he ask the seemingly contradictory question, 'And why should they not bow down?' To show that this is indeed a rhetorical objection (ākṣepa), he introduces it by displaying the doubt to be resolved, starting with 'How...'. The ellipsis is 'in such a doubt...'; and this is the answer to it. To refute the narrow understanding of 'Mahatman' as merely 'noble-minded', he says 'He is both full (complete) and the Self'. To prevent the misconception of 'Atman' as the individual soul (jiva), he says 'Atman'. He defines it etymologically: 'Yad' (which) because He obtains (aap), accepts (daa), experiences (ad) the objects here in this body, and His constant state is eternal existence (derived from 'tan'). The universe consisting of existence and non-existence is said to be 'You alone' only because You are the provider of their existence, etc., and not in an absolute sense of identity, for if it were so, it would contradict the subsequent statements. With this intent, he recites it and comments with proof, saying 'tat param' etc.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
He explains His power in the form of all-pervasiveness: 'Krishna indeed is the Supreme Brahman, the infinite Sat-Chit-Ananda. He is of two forms; He is all (the manifest universe), and yet He is one and distinct from it.' With the intention that although He is one, He is indeed all, Arjuna addresses Him as 'O infinite in power!' (Anantavirya) and 'O All!' (He Sarva). You pervade the universe, which means You alone exist in the form of the entire cosmos.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Salutations be to You in the front, i.e., in the forward direction; or, let there be salutations in front of You. The word 'atha' is used in the sense of conjunction. Salutations be to You behind as well. To You, who exist on all sides, i.e., in all directions. O All! 'Virya' (might) means physical strength, and 'vikrama' (valor) means training or skill in the use of weapons. As it is said, 'one is considered superior in strength, while another is superior in training,' these qualities are distributed individually among Bhima, Duryodhana, and others. But You are possessed of both infinite strength and immeasurable skill in weapons; thus, it is a single compound word. Or, 'Anantavirya' is a vocative address. You completely pervade ('samapnoshi') the entire universe ('sarvam') by Your single Self of the nature of Existence (Sad-roopa), as the Self of all; therefore, You are All. The meaning is that nothing exists apart from You.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore, 'Namah' etc. O All! O Self of all! Salutations to You in all directions. Arjuna explains the Lord's quality of being the Self of all: You, whose potency (virya) is infinite and whose valor (vikrama) is immeasurable. Being such, You completely pervade the entire universe inside and outside as the Self of all, just as gold exists pervading its own effects/modifications like bracelets and earrings; therefore You are of the form of all.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Salutations to You who exist in that respective form in the East (front). And salutations be to You behind (in the West). To You, who exist in all directions. O All! Alternatively, 'purastat' means at the beginning of actions, 'prishthatah' means at their completion, and 'sarvatah' means also in the middle; let there be salutations to You. However, in this interpretation, there is the defect of ellipsis (introducing the word 'actions' which is not in the text) and a lack of justification for restricting the scope of 'sarvatah'. He explains the statement 'O All!': You are the one who has infinite capacity (strength) and immeasurable prowess in the matter of weapons, etc. The alternative division of the words 'O infinite in power' as a separate address is not presented by the Acharyas because it is verbose and has no special significance. You completely pervade ('samapnoshi') the entire universe ('sarvam'). Therefore, You are All. The meaning is that nothing exists without You.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
With the intent of supporting Shruti passages such as 'They call Him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni...' [RV 2.3.22.6] and 'That indeed is Agni, that is Vayu, that is Surya...' [T.A. 10.1], the body-soul relationship (sarira-atma-bhava) indicated by 'by You the universe is pervaded' (11.38) is stated as the reason for the co-ordinate predication in 'You are Vayu, Yama, Agni' etc. Thus he says: 'Therefore You alone...'. Because no specific relation is mentioned, the status of being the great-grandfather (prapitamaha) is universal; hence he says, 'You alone are the great-grandfather of all'. The word 'ca' (and) is used to include the grandfather (Brahma) and others. Since there is no other absolute great-grandfather, and such status is impossible for anyone else except by having the Lord as their inner Self (their body), he explains: 'the fathers of all beings, i.e., Prajapatis like Daksha, etc.' The status of grandfather-hood associated by 'ca' is due to His being their inner Self; hence he says, 'by being the Self of Brahma (the grandfather) and others'. The reason for bowing repeatedly as in 'Salutations, salutations to You' is the fear and joy generated by experiencing the Lord's supremacy and accessibility revealed by the display of the Cosmic Form. Hence he says 'having an extremely wonderful form'. To prevent the misinterpretation of 'Anantavirya' as 'having power like the serpent Ananta', he explains it as 'of limitless power'. Since interpreting 'amita' as 'unknowable' would contradict scriptural teachings, it is explained as 'of immeasurable valor'. In 'You pervade all' (sarvam samapnoshi), to reject a passive pervasion like that of space, the pervasion in the sense of ruling as the inner Self of all, as stated in the Shruti 'He who entering within is the ruler of people, the Self of all' [T.A. 3.11.1], is intended. Hence he says, 'all as the Self'. To support the co-ordinate predication of the word 'all' in Shrutis like 'Purusha indeed is all this', 'the Self indeed is all this', 'Narayana indeed is all this', the co-ordinate predication in 'therefore You are All' (sarvah asi) is not in the sense of sublation (badha) of the world, but is based on the relationship of body and soul indicating qualified oneness (visishta-aikya). Hence he says 'since You...' etc. The conclusion of this section is that in all Vedas, Vedanta, and their expositions, the co-ordinate predication of words denoting the Lord with all words denoting sentient and non-sentient entities is based solely on the body-soul relationship. With this intent, he refers to 'You are the imperishable, being and non-being' etc.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Furthermore, 'Namah' etc. O All! O Self of all! Let there be salutations and salutations to You in the East (front), in the West (behind), and on all sides, i.e., in all directions including South, North, and corners. The sentiment is: just as in statements like 'What seat can be offered to Him whose seat is Garuda?', we realize that nothing else can be done except offering salutations. This is indicated by the word 'eva' (indeed). Alternatively, it means: let the salutations made from behind, from the South, the North, and all sides, be accepted as if made directly in front, facing You. But how can a salutation made from behind be considered as facing You? To this, he says 'Ananta' etc.: You, who have infinite capacity (might) and immeasurable valor, pervade the entire world. You exist in the form of all through diverse names and forms; therefore, You are All. Thus, even if salutation is offered from behind, the quality of facing the front is not contradicted.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
O infinite in power! Because You pervade everything completely as one undivided whole, therefore Your name is 'All' (Sarva). 'Purastat' (in front) means at the beginning of actions. 'Prishthatah' (behind) means at their completion. 'Sarvatah' (on all sides) means in the middle of them as well; let there be salutations to You.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Obeisances to You from the front, from behind and from all sides! O unbounded power, You are the master of limitless might! You are all-pervading, and thus You are everything!

 Out of loving ecstasy for Kṛṣṇa, his friend, Arjuna is offering his respects from all sides. He is accepting that He is the master of all potencies and all prowess and far superior to all the great warriors assembled on the battlefield. It is said in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.9.69): yo ’yaṁ tavāgato deva samīpaṁ devatā-gaṇaḥ sa tvam eva jagat-sraṣṭā yataḥ sarva-gato bhavān “Whoever comes before You, even if he be a demigod, is created by You, O Supreme Personality of Godhead.”