Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
asatyamapratiṣṭhaṃ te jagadāhuranīśvaram .
aparasparasambhūtaṃ kimanyatkāmahaitukam

Word Meanings:
असत्यम् - without truth
अप्रतिष्ठम् - without basis
ते - they
जगत् - the world
आहुः - say
अनीश्वरम् - without a God
अपरस्परसम्भूतम् - brought about by mutual
किम् - what
अन्यत - else
कामहैतुकम् - with lust for its

Life Application:
They say world is without truth, without moral basis, without God, brought about by mutual union caused by lust.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
They say, 'This universe is without truth, without moral basis, and without God; it is brought about only by mutual union, and has lust for its cause; what else?'

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
They say, "This universe is without truth, without (moral) basis, without a God, brought about by mutual union, with lust for its cause; what else?"

असत्यम् without truth? अप्रतिष्ठम् without (moral) basis? ते they? जगत् the world? आहुः say? अनीश्वरम् without a God? अपरस्परसम्भूतम् brought about by mutual union? किम् what? अन्यत else? कामहैतुकम् with lust for its cause.Commentary They hold that the universe is without any substratum or support or an undying basic reality.This is a description of the opinion of atheists like the Charvakas and other materialists. They do not believe in the existence of Brahman Who is the support of this world. They do not even accept the existence of an Isvara in this world. They say We are unreal. Therefore this world also is unreal? the scriptures which declare the truth are also unreal. What else but lust can be the cause of this universe Sexual passion is the sole cause of all living creatures. There is no such thing as the theory of Karma. The whole world is caused by the mutual union of man and woman under the impulse of lust. There is neither virtue nor vice. There is no Lord Who dispenses the fruits of actions of the individuals according to virtue and vice. Dharma and Adharma are not the basis of this world. Sexual desire is the sole basis for this universe. This world is a world of chance. They are not endowed with the faculty of introspection. They are ignorant of the field (Nature) and knower of the field (God).Mutual union Sexual union it may mean the union of atoms. The world arose from the combination of atoms according to the Vaiseshikas.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
They say the universe is an accident with no purpose and no God. Life is created by sexual union, a product of lust and nothing else.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
They say, 'This universe is without truth, without (moral) basis, without a God, brought about by mutual union, with lust for its cause; what else?'

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that the demoniacal represent the pure materialists (such as the Charvakas) who view life through a limited, purely physical lens. They deny any divine substratum or truth (asatyam) behind the universe, nor do they accept a moral basis (apratistham) governed by righteousness. For them, there is no Supreme Ruler (anisvaram) directing the universe; everything is a product of chance combination of material elements. They believe the only driver of life is sex desire (kamahaitukam) and lust is the cause of all existence. This outlook reduces human life to a beastly level of sensory gratification.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
They say that this world is without truth; has no basis; and has no Lord; this is born not on the basis of the mutual cause-and-effect-relation  [of the things]; it has nothing [beyond] and has no cause.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
They maintain:  'The universe is without truth, without any foundation and without a Lord (Isvara). What else can exist without mutual causation?  It has lust for its cause.'

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
They say that the world is unreal, it has no basis, it is without a God. It is born of mutual union brought about by passion! What other (cause can there be)?

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that the demoniac deny that Vishnu is the truth, the support, and the Lord of this world. While scriptures state that the world is born from mutual cause and effect (from food beings arise, etc.), the demoniac claim it is born only of lust.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the demoniac nature denies the existence of Brahman as the controller of the world and denies the validity of scriptures. They assert that the world is a product of chance combinations of atoms or elements driven solely by desire.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
They say, 'The world is without truth, without moral basis, and without God, brought about by the union of male and female; therefore, lust is its only cause, and nothing else.'

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that those of demoniac nature deny the existence of moral and spiritual truths. They view religious activities (charity, penance, pilgrimage) as useless. They assert there is no moral order (dharma/adharma) or Supreme Lord who dispenses the fruits of actions. According to them, the universe is merely a biological accident caused by the union of male and female, meaning lust is the only source and purpose of life.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
They maintain that the universe is 'without truth,' viz., they do not accept that this universe, which is the effect of Brahman denoted by the term Satya, has Brahman for its Self. They contend that it is bereft of any 'foundation,' viz., they do not accept that it has Brahman for its foundation. Brahman as Ananta supports the earth and bears all the worlds, as declared in 'This earth, sustained upon the head of this great serpent, supports in its turn, this garland of worlds, along with their men, demons and gods' (V.P., 2.5.27). They say that it is 'without a Lord,' viz. they don't accept that this universe is controlled by Me, the Lord of all, the Supreme Brahman, whose will is always true. It has been already averred:  'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8). And they also contend thus:  'What else can exist without mutual causation?'  i.e., except by the union of the male and the female among men, beasts etc. What else exists apart from this nature?  The meaning is that nothing else is seen. Therefore the entire world is rooted in sexual lust.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Asatyam etc.  [It] has nothing beyond :  Here there is no other thing beyond what is seen.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Te, they, the domoniacal persons; ahuh, say; that the jagat, world; is asatyam, unreal-as we ourselves are prone to falsehood, so is this whole world unreal; apratistham, it has no basis, it does not have righteousness and unrighteousness as its basis; it is anisvaram, without a God-nor is there a God who rules this (world) according to rigtheousness and unrighteousness (of beings). Hence they say that the world is godless. Moreover, it is aparaspara-sambhutam, born of mutual union. The whole world is born of the union of the male and female impelled by passion. (That union is) kama-haitukam, brought about by passion. Kama-haitukam and kama-hetukam are the same. Kim anyat, what other (cause can there be)? There exists to other unseen cause such as righteousness, unrigtheousness, etc. Certainly, the passion of living beings is the cause of the world. This is the view of the materialists.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that the Charvaka (materialist) view denies the authority of the Vedas (asatyam), the existence of dharma and adharma (apratistham), and the existence of God as the dispenser of fruits of action (anisvaram). They hold that lust alone is the cause of all beings.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the demoniac deny the authority of the Vedas and Puranas. They do not accept the moral order of dharma and adharma, nor do they accept a creator God. They believe that the union of male and female driven by lust is the sole cause of this world.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that in the view of materialists, there is no unseen cause (karma) or ruler (God). They attribute the variety of the world only to nature and physical union driven by lust.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'asatyam' means the demoniac deny that Brahman is the true cause and essence of the universe. 'Apratistham' means they deny that Brahman supports the universe, and 'anisvaram' means they deny His supreme control.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that the demoniac deny the validity of Veda and Puranas, declaring the world to be without foundation and God. They assert that the union of male and female driven by lust is the only source.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the demoniac assert the world is without truth (virtue) and moral basis (karma). They believe creatures are born from nature and physical lust, not from any divine providence.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
They say that this world is unreal, with no foundation, no God in control. They say it is produced of sex desire and has no cause other than lust.

 The demonic conclude that the world is phantasmagoria. There is no cause and effect, no controller, no purpose: everything is unreal. They say that this cosmic manifestation arises due to chance material actions and reactions. They do not think that the world was created by God for a certain purpose. They have their own theory: that the world has come about in its own way and that there is no reason to believe that there is a God behind it. For them there is no difference between spirit and matter, and they do not accept the Supreme Spirit. Everything is matter only, and the whole cosmos is supposed to be a mass of ignorance. According to them, everything is void, and whatever manifestation exists is due to our ignorance in perception. They take it for granted that all manifestation of diversity is a display of ignorance, just as in a dream we may create so many things which actually have no existence. Then when we are awake we shall see that everything is simply a dream. But factually, although the demons say that life is a dream, they are very expert in enjoying this dream. And so, instead of acquiring knowledge, they become more and more implicated in their dreamland. They conclude that as a child is simply the result of sexual intercourse between man and woman, this world is born without any soul. For them it is only a combination of matter that has produced the living entities, and there is no question of the existence of the soul. As many living creatures come out from perspiration and from a dead body without any cause, the whole living world has come out of the material combinations of the cosmic manifestation. Therefore material nature is the cause of this manifestation, and there is no other cause. They do not believe in the words of Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-gītā , mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: “Under My direction the whole material world is moving.” In other words, among the demons there is no perfect knowledge of the creation of the world; every one of them has some particular theory of his own. According to them, one interpretation of the scriptures is as good as another, for they do not believe in a standard understanding of the scriptural injunctions.