Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
na vedayajñādhyayanairna dānaira- na ca kriyābhirna tapobhirugraiḥ .
evaṃrūpaḥ śakya ahaṃ nṛloke draṣṭuṃ tvadanyena kurupravīra

Word Meanings:
न - not
वेदयज्ञाध्ययनैः - by the study of the Vedas and sacrifices
न - not
दानैः - by gifts
न - not
च - and
क्रियाभिः - by rituals
न - not
तपोभिः - by austerities
उग्रैः - severe
एवंरूपः - in such form
शक्यः - possible
अहम् - I
नृलोके - in the world of mortals
द्रष्टुम् - to be seen
त्वत् - than thee
अन्येन - by another
कुरुप्रवीर - O great hero of the Kurus

Life Application:
Recognize that the cosmic form cannot be seen merely through rituals, study, charity, or severe austerities without grace.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O great hero of the Kurus! Other than you, in this world of men, I cannot be seen in this form by anyone else, either through the study of the Vedas, or sacrifices, or charity, or (religious) rituals, or even by severe austerities.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Neither by the study of the Vedas and sacrifices, nor by gifts nor by rituals nor by severe austerities can I be seen in this form in the world of men by any other than thyself, O great hero of the Kurus (Arjuna).

न not? वेदयज्ञाध्ययनैः by the study of the Vedas and of Yajnas? न not? दानैः by gifts? न not? च and? क्रियाभिः by rituals? न not? तपोभिः by austerities? उग्रैः severe? एवंरूपः in such form? शक्यः (am) possible? अहम् I? नृलोके in the world of men? द्रष्टुम् to be seen? त्वत् than thee? अन्येन by another? कुरुप्रवीर O great hero of the Kurus.Commentary Mere cramming of the texts of the Vedas without knowing the meaning will not do. A study of the sacrifices also is necessary. One should know the meaning of these? also.Dana Charity such as a Tula Purusha (gift of gold eal in weight of a man) Kanyadana (gift of ones daughther in marriage)? gift of a cow? rice? etc.Kriya Rituals such as Agnihotra.Tapas Such as the Chandrayana Vrata. (This is a kind of Vrata or observance. The daily consumption of food is reduced by one mouthful every day for the dark half of the month beginning with the fullmoon. Then the food is increased by one mouthful every day during the bright fortnight during the increase of the moon. This Vrata (observance) is a great purifier of the mind. It destroys sins.)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Not by study of the scriptures, not by sacrifice or gift, not by ritual or rigorous austerity, is it possible for man on earth to see what thou hast seen, O thou foremost hero of the Kuru-clan!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Here the Lord clarifies why Arjuna is worthy of special commendation for obtaining this extraordinary experience. He says that merely by the study of the Vedas or the performance of sacrifices, one does not acquire the eligibility to see this Universal Form. Similarly, the merit obtained from charity, righteousness, or the practice of austerities also does not grant the right to this vision. In short, what is difficult to attain even through the practice of rigorous spiritual disciplines, Arjuna has achieved, and for this reason he deserves special commendation. Let no one misunderstand the Lord's words here to mean that He has condemned the study of the Vedas, etc., or that all these means are useless and should be abandoned. The point is that study, sacrifice, charity, and austerity are all means for purification of the mind and attainment of concentration, which are essential for perceiving unity in diversity. But let no one also think that the means of sacrifice, charity, etc., are complete in themselves or that they are the goal. One cannot have the direct experience and realization of oneness merely through the study of the Vedas. Only when the mind, equipped with the necessary means, becomes free from thought-waves, is this vision possible in that introspective state. The point is that the preparation of food cannot in itself satisfy hunger, but this does not mean that cooking is unnecessary. From this perspective, we should understand the meaning of this verse. The Lord further says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Not by the knowledge of the Vedas and sacrifices, nor by making gifts, nor by the rituals, nor by severe austerities, can I be seen in this form in the world of men,  by anybody other than yourself, O the great hero of the Kurus !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Neither through the study of the Vedas, nor by sacrifices, nor by recitals of the scriptures, nor by gifts, nor by rituals, nor by strict austerities can I be realised in a form like this in the world of men by any one else but you. O Arjuna!

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Not by the study of the Vedas and sacrifices, not by gifts, not even by rituals, not by severe austerities can I, in this form, be perceived in the human world by anyone ['By anyone who has not received My grace'. other than you, O most valiant among the Kurus.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
By the word 'tat' (that), the context of the present vision is referred to. Anticipating the objection that mentioning the study of sacrifices separately from the study of the Vedas is a redundancy, it says: 'na veda...'. And it should not be said that by the mention of the study of the Vedas alone, the knowledge of sacrifices is also grasped, because study culminates in understanding the meaning; rather, it is established by the elders that study culminates in the grasp of the syllables. The non-combination (of letters/hiatus) is for completing the verse. 'By anyone other than you' means by one who is devoid of My grace.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O great hero of the Kurus! In this world of men, I, in this form of the Universal Vision, cannot be seen by anyone other than you (the recipient of My grace), neither by the study of the Vedas, nor by the performance of sacrifices, nor by charity, nor by severe austerities, nor by rituals alone.

Commentary—'kurupravīra'—The purpose of addressing Arjuna as 'kurupravīra' here is to imply that among all the Kurus, your curiosity arose to hear instruction from Me, and to see and know My form, which shows your superiority among the Kurus. The implication is that having the desire to see and know the Lord is indeed the superiority of a human being. 'na vedayajñādhyayanairna dānairna ca kriyābhirna tapobhirugraiḥ'—Studying the Vedas, performing sacrifices in accordance with scriptural rites, giving large charities, performing very severe (the most difficult) austerities, and performing auspicious deeds like pilgrimages, fasts, etc.—none of these actions can become the cause for the vision of the Universal Form. This is because all actions that are performed have a beginning and an end. Therefore, the result obtained from those actions also has a beginning and an end. Thus, how can the infinite, boundless, imperishable, divine Universal Form of the Lord be seen through such actions? Its vision is obtained only by the grace of the Lord. This is because the Lord is eternal and His grace is also eternal. Therefore, it is only through eternal grace that Arjuna has received the vision of the Lord's eternal, imperishable, divine Universal Form. The meaning is that neither individually nor collectively do these means have the capacity to enable the vision of the Cosmic Form. The vision of the Cosmic Form can only be attained through the grace and pleasure of the Lord. In the Gita, usually, sacrifice, charity, and austerity—these three are described. In the twenty-eighth verse of the eighth chapter and the fifty-third verse of this chapter, four things—Vedas, sacrifice, charity, and austerity—are described; and here, five things—Vedas, sacrifice, charity, austerity, and rituals (kriyā)—are described. In the twenty-eighth verse of the eighth chapter, the locative case and plural number are used, and in the verse here, the instrumental case and plural number are used, whereas in other places, usually the nominative case and singular number are used. The purpose of using the instrumental case and plural number here is that even if one of these means like Vedas, sacrifice, charity, etc., is performed with great intensity many times, or if all the means are performed with great intensity many times, still all those means cannot become the cause of the vision of the Universal Form; that is, the Universal Form cannot be seen through them. This is because seeing the Universal Form is not the fruit of any action.

Just as it is said here that the Universal Form cannot be seen by means of the Vedas, sacrifices, etc., showing the rarity of the Universal Form, similarly in the fifty-third verse ahead, it is said that the four-armed form cannot be seen by means of the Vedas, sacrifices, etc., showing the rarity of the vision of the four-armed form. There, one-pointed devotion (ananya-bhakti) is stated as the means to see the four-armed form (11.54); because that form is so extraordinary that even the gods desire to see it. Therefore, devotion can be directed toward that form. But looking at the Universal Form causes fear; so how can there be devotion to such a form, how can there be love? Therefore, devotion is not stated as the means for its vision. This can only be seen through the pleasure and grace of the Lord. 'evaṁrūpaḥ śakya ahaṁ nṛloke draṣṭuṁ tvadanyena'—that no one else in the world of men other than you can see My Universal Form through these means—does not mean that you could see it because of these means. I have shown this form to you solely out of My grace. Even the vision of the Universal Form that Sanjaya was having was due to the divine vision granted by the grace of Vyasaji, and not by any other means. The meaning is that what is accomplished by the grace of the Lord and His devotees or saints cannot be accomplished by spiritual practices alone. Their grace is also uncaused (without motives).

Some people, due to lack of proper understanding, say that the Lord did not show the Universal Form to Arjuna, but rather explained to him that infinite universes exist in a single part of His body. But in reality, this is not the case at all. The Lord Himself has said, 'See now the entire universe, moving and unmoving, centered in one place in this body of Mine' (11.7). When Arjuna could not see it, the Lord said, 'But you cannot see Me with these physical eyes of yours; therefore I give you divine vision' (11.8). Then the Lord, having given divine eyes to Arjuna, actually showed His Universal Form. Sanjaya also said that Arjuna saw the Universal Form situated in one place in the body of the Lord (11.13). Arjuna, while beholding the Universal Form, also said, 'I see all the gods and hosts of diverse beings in Your body, and also Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, etc.' (11.15) and so on. This proves that the Lord had shown His Universal Form to Arjuna in direct perception. Secondly, the eye of wisdom (jñāna-cakṣu) is for understanding (Gita 13.34; 15.11), but direct vision is obtained through the divine eye (divya-cakṣu). Therefore, it is not that the Lord merely explained it by words.

Connection—In order to remove Arjuna's fear, the Lord commands him in the next verse to see His friendly form.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
In this form, which represents My real nature, I cannot be realised by such means as study of the Vedas, sacrifices etc., by anyone who is bereft of exclusive Bhakti towards Me or by any one other than yourself who has complete devotion towards Me.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Na veda-yajna-adhyayanaih, not by the study of the Vedas and sacrifices, (i.e.) not by the methodical study of even the four Vedas and the study of the sacrifices-since the study of the sacrifices is achieved by the very study of the Vedas, the separate mention of the study of sacrifices is for suggesting detailed knowledge of sacrifices; [This separate mention of the study of sacrifices is necessary because the ancients understood the study of Vedas to mean learing them by rote.] so also, na danaih, not by gifts-in such forms as distributing wealth eal to the weight of the giver; na ca kriyabhih, not even by rituals-by Vedic and other rituals like Agnihotra etc.; nor even ugraih tapobhih, by severe austerities such a Candrayana [A religious observance or expiatory penance regulated by the moon's phases. In it the daily antity of food, which consists of fifteen mouthfuls at the full-moon, is curtailed by one mouthful during the dark fornight till it is reduced to nothing at the new moon; and it is increased in a like manner during the bright fortnight.-V.S.A.] etc. which are frightful; sakyah aham, can I; evam rupam, in this form-possessing the Cosmic form as was shown; drastum, be perceived; nrloke, in the human world; tvad-anyena, by anyone other than you; kuru-pravira, O most valiant among the Kurus.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
He states that other than by devotion which is obtainable solely by My grace, I cannot be seen even in this way by all other means: 'na veda...'. I, Purushottama Krishna, possessing this divine form, cannot be seen in the world of men. The mere Aksara (imperishable Brahman) etc., can indeed be seen by its worshippers through means like Vedic discourses, but not I, the Purushottama, because I am attainable only through one-pointed devotion, as stated in the Bhagavata: 'I can be attained only through exclusive devotion' (11.14.21). Even among those, others besides you, who are My graced devotees, are not able to see Me in this manner, because this vision is also obtained through My grace; you, however, have seen it solely due to My grace. This indeed is Pushti: 'Pushti (nourishment) is His grace' (Bhagavata 2.10.4). The Commentator (Bhashyakara) states that Pushti is the attainment of Himself through His own power (prameya-bala) even for those who are devoid of means. In brief, when there is no attainment of the form of Purushottama even after performing all means, and there is a state of humility and distress, and a very firm seed-like attachment (asakti) is graced by the Lord, that grace is Pushti. This path of grace (Prameya-vartma) is clearly shown in the sixth canto of the Bhagavata, in the episode of the dialogue between Yama's messengers and Vishnu's messengers narrated by Shuka: 'This indeed is the direct path in the world, safe, free from fear' (Bhagavata 6.1.17), which should be understood from there. The reasoning for this is to be seen described in many ways in the text Bhakti-hetu.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Wishing to convey that you are indeed blessed by receiving My grace, which is in the form of this extremely rare vision of My form, He says: 'na veda...'. By the study of the four Vedas, which consists of grasping the letters, and also by the study of sacrifices, which consists of reflecting on the meaning of the rituals ordained in the Vedas through the Mimamsa, Kalpasutras, etc. (together referred to as veda-yajna-adhyayanaiḥ); by gifts like Tulapurusha, etc.; by rituals like the Agnihotra and other Vedic rites; by severe austerities like Krcchra, Candrayana, etc., which are difficult to perform as they dry up the body and senses; I, in this form, cannot be seen in the world of men by anyone other than you, who are devoid of My grace. O great hero of the Kurus! The omission of the visarga in 'sakyo' (for 'sakyah') is a Vedic anomaly (chandasa). The repetition of the negative particle 'na' in each case is to emphasize the negation. In the phrase 'na ca kriyabhih', the word 'ca' (and) aggregates other unmentioned means.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Stating that you are blessed by obtaining this extremely rare vision, He says: 'na...'. Since there is no study of sacrifices distinct from the study of the Vedas, by the word 'yajna' (sacrifice), the science of sacrifice, such as the Kalpasutras, is indicated. Thus, it means 'by the study of the Vedas and the sciences of sacrifice'. Neither by charity, nor by rituals like the Agnihotra etc., nor by severe austerities like the Candrayana etc., can I, in this form, be seen in the world of men by anyone other than you; rather, you alone are blessed by seeing it solely due to My grace.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
With the intention of stating that you have indeed become blessed by the vision of My Universal Form, He says: 'na...'. Not by the study of the four Vedas, which is characterized by reciting after the teacher; nor by the study of sacrifices, which means the study of the science of sacrifice like Mimamsa, Kalpasutras, etc.; nor by gifts like the gift of cows, etc.; nor by rituals, which are the performing of Vedic and Smriti rites; nor by severe, dreadful, body-drying austerities like Candrayana, etc.; can I, who have this exhibited Universal Form, be seen by anyone other than you, who are devoid of My grace. Others are merely Kurus or Kuru heroes. But you have obtained excellence by getting the vision of My form, indicating this He addresses him as: 'O great hero of the Kurus (kurupravīra)'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
How is it that this form has never been seen before by anyone other than Me, when its vision could be possible for others as well by some means? To explain this, He introduces the next verse starting with 'ananya-bhakti-vyatiriktair...'. Since the form of Krishna's incarnation was visible to everyone, the phrase 'evamrupah' (in this form) cannot refer to that ordinary form; hence, implying that it refers to the supernatural, non-material form distinct from humans, etc., he says: 'yathavasthito'ham' (I as I really am). The idea is that for those devoid of exclusive devotion, the vision of the incarnate form is indeed an incorrect (ayathavasthita) perception in the form of a human-like, material being. Taking 'tvat' (from you) as a separate word referring to the devotee, and intending 'other than you who are devoted to Me', he says: 'mayi bhaktimatas tvatto'nyena'. If 'other than you' meant literally other than Arjuna, it would contradict the subsequent statement: 'But by single-minded devotion, O Arjuna, I can be known, seen in truth...' (11.54); therefore, only those other than devotees are intended, which is why he says: 'by anyone who is devoid of exclusive devotion'. The word 'veda' refers to the Vedas heard with their meaning. By this, the listening (sravana) mentioned in 'srotavyah' is obtained. Since study is mentioned separately, the word 'kriya' (ritual) by the maxim of 'bull and cattle' (go-balivarda-nyaya) refers to rituals like homa which are distinct from the study of sacrifices; thus, intending 'by study of the Vedas, sacrifices, etc.'. Since the Upanishadic text 'The Brahmanas seek to know Him through the study of the Vedas, through sacrifices, through charity, and through austerity...' (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4.22) shows that study, sacrifice, etc., are means to this vision through devotion, how is there a negation here? To resolve this doubt, he says: 'kevalaih' (by these alone, i.e., without devotion).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus this form has been shown solely by your wish; now behold My former form. Showing His immense grace upon Arjuna due to the rarity of the form to be seen, He says: 'na veda...'. Neither by the study of the Vedas, which consist of words with their meanings, nor by the study of sacrifices, which are the actions of knowledge along with their sequences, etc. (referred to as veda-yajna-adhyayanaiḥ); nor by gifts like Tulapurusha, etc.; nor by rituals in the form of Agnihotra, etc.; nor by severe austerities like Krcchra, Candrayana, etc.; in the world of men, I, the Purushottama, O great hero of the Kurus (kurupravīra), the best among the clan of devotees, cannot be seen by anyone other than you, leaving you aside, even by the aforementioned means.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Stating that this form is accessible only through Yoga and is difficult for ritualists (karmin) to attain, he says: 'na veda...'. Neither by the study or understanding of the Vedas and sacrifices, nor by gifts, nor by rituals mentioned in the Smritis like constructing wells, ponds, gardens, etc. (purta); nor by austerities like Krcchra, Candrayana, etc., or severe ones like month-long fasts, etc.; can I, in this form, be seen in the world of men. The lack of duplicate 'ru' sound (in 'rorutva') is an archaic usage (arsha). By anyone other than you, O great hero of the Kurus.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this universal form of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor by performing sacrifices, nor by charity, nor by pious activities, nor by severe penances can I be seen in this form in the material world.

 The divine vision in this connection should be clearly understood. Who can have divine vision? Divine means godly. Unless one attains the status of divinity as a demigod, he cannot have divine vision. And what is a demigod? It is stated in the Vedic scriptures that those who are devotees of Lord Viṣṇu are demigods ( viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daivaḥ ). Those who are atheistic, i.e., who do not believe in Viṣṇu, or who recognize only the impersonal part of Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme, cannot have the divine vision. It is not possible to decry Kṛṣṇa and at the same time have the divine vision. One cannot have the divine vision without becoming divine. In other words, those who have divine vision can also see like Arjuna. The Bhagavad-gītā gives the description of the universal form. Although this description was unknown to everyone before Arjuna, now one can have some idea of the viśva-rūpa after this incident. Those who are actually divine can see the universal form of the Lord. But one cannot be divine without being a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. The devotees, however, who are actually in the divine nature and who have divine vision, are not very much interested in seeing the universal form of the Lord. As described in the previous verse, Arjuna desired to see the four-handed form of Lord Kṛṣṇa as Viṣṇu, and he was actually afraid of the universal form. In this verse there are some significant words, just like veda-yajñādhyayanaiḥ, which refers to studying Vedic literature and the subject matter of sacrificial regulations. Veda refers to all kinds of Vedic literature, such as the four Vedas ( Ṛg, Yajur, Sāma and Atharva ) and the eighteen Purāṇas, the Upaniṣads and the Vedānta-sūtra. One can study these at home or anywhere else. Similarly, there are sūtras – Kalpa-sūtras and Mīmāṁsā-sūtras – for studying the method of sacrifice. Dānaiḥ refers to charity which is offered to a suitable party, such as those who are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord – the brāhmaṇas and the Vaiṣṇavas. Similarly, “pious activities” refers to the agni-hotra and the prescribed duties of the different castes. And the voluntary acceptance of some bodily pains is called tapasya. So one can perform all these – can accept bodily penances, give charity, study the Vedas, etc. – but unless he is a devotee like Arjuna, it is not possible to see that universal form. Those who are impersonalists are also imagining that they are seeing the universal form of the Lord, but from Bhagavad-gītā we understand that the impersonalists are not devotees. Therefore they are unable to see the universal form of the Lord. There are many persons who create incarnations. They falsely claim an ordinary human to be an incarnation, but this is all foolishness. We should follow the principles of Bhagavad-gītā , otherwise there is no possibility of attaining perfect spiritual knowledge. Although Bhagavad-gītā is considered the preliminary study of the science of God, still it is so perfect that it enables one to distinguish what is what. The followers of a pseudo incarnation may say that they have also seen the transcendental incarnation of God, the universal form, but that is unacceptable because it is clearly stated here that unless one becomes a devotee of Kṛṣṇa one cannot see the universal form of God. So one first of all has to become a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa; then he can claim that he can show the universal form of what he has seen. A devotee of Kṛṣṇa cannot accept false incarnations or followers of false incarnations.