Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sarvabhūteṣu yenaikaṃ bhāvamavyayamīkṣate .
avibhaktaṃ vibhakteṣu tajjñānaṃ viddhi sāttvikam

Word Meanings:
सर्वभूतेषु - in all beings
येन - by which
एकम् - one
भावम् - reality
अव्ययम् - indestructible
ईक्षते - sees
अविभक्तम् - inseparable
विभक्तेषु - in the separated
तत् - that
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
विद्धि - know
सात्त्विकम् - Sattvic .

Life Application:
Knowledge by which one sees one imperishable reality in all beings, undivided in the divided—is Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
That knowledge by which one sees one indestructible Reality in all beings, undivided in the divided, know that knowledge to be Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
That by which one sees the one indestructible Reality in all beings, not separate in all the separate beings  know thou that knowledge to be Sattvic.

सर्वभूतेषु in all beings? येन by which? एकम् one? भावम् reality? अव्ययम् indestructible? ईक्षते (one) sees? अविभक्तम् inseparable? विभक्तेषु in the separated? तत् that? ज्ञानम् knowledge? विद्धि know? सात्त्विकम् Sattvic (pure).Commentary That knowledge that sees no difference in all objects that are perceived? is pure. The seer beholds the one allpervading imperishable substance or essence behind the seeming diversity of the objects. He beholds unity in diversity? one in many? all in one. He sees that all the diverse objects are rooted in the One.Bhavam Reality The One Self.Sarvabhuteshu In all beings From the Unmanifested down to the insentient and unmoving objects.Avyayam Indestructible inexhaustible unchangeable that which cannot be exhausted either in itself or in its properties immutable.Just as the ether is indivisible? so also the Self is indivisible. The Self is the same in all bodies. It is the common consciousness in all bodies. It is not different in different bodies. It is one homogeneous indivisible essence or substance in all bodies? in all beings. Know thou? O Arjuna? this direct and right perception of the nondual Self as Sattvic (pure). (Cf.IV.35VI.29XIII.16?28XVIII.30)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
That knowledge which sees the One Indestructible in all beings, the One Indivisible in all separate lives, may be truly called Pure Knowledge.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The classification of knowledge, action, and doer is meant for the seeker's self-examination and self-development. An aspiring seeker should strive to establish themselves in the mode of goodness (sattva). Through self-examination, we can recognize our flaws and correct them immediately. By sattvic knowledge, we perceive the single indestructible Truth within all beings. Though the outer forms are infinite, the underlying Self is one. Here, sattvic knowledge is not ignoring the dualistic world, but recognizing the underlying unity amidst all diversity, like seeing water in various waves. Though the Self appears different in different bodies, it is undivided like space in different pots. That knowledge is sattvic.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
That instrument-of-knowledge, by means of which one perceives in all beings the singular immutable Existence, the Unclassified in the classified ones - that you must know to be born of  the Sattva (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Know that Knowledge to be Sattvika by which one sees in all beings, one immutable existence undivided in the divided.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Know that knowledge to be originating from sattva through which one sees a single, undecaying, undivided Entity in all the diversified things.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Ekam bhavam' refers to the one Lord Vishnu, who is the Supreme Self in all.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The Lord describes the threefold knowledge, beginning with the Sattvic. 'Ekam bhavam' denotes the non-dual, undivided, immutable Self. In different bodies, it remains undivided like space.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
That knowledge by which one sees the undivided indestructible Reality in all divided beings, know that knowledge to be Sattvic.

Commentary: The presence of existence ('is-ness') in all changing beings belongs to the Supreme. In all changing names and forms, the wise person sees the unchanging eternal Reality. In all separate situations, events, and individuals, they see the same underlying Truth. This results in the absence of attachment and aversion (raga-dvesha). In conditional life, this is called Sattvic knowledge. When freed from all conditions, it is pure Self-realization.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The self (Atman), which is of the form of knowledge, is alike and uniform, though distinct, in all beings, even though they may externally, and from the point of view of duty, be distinguished as Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, householders, celibates, fair, tall etc. The immutable selves in all these perishing forms or bodies are unaffected by the fruits of actions. Such knowledge of the immutability of the self in all changing beings, is Sattvika.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.20–18.22 jointly): Sarvabhutesu etc. upto samudahrtam.  In the classified ones : i.e.,  [classified] as gods, human beings, etc.  Considers as [really] different :  i.e., with the thought  'Here on this depends my pleasure; here in that lies my displeasure'.  Without reason :  To take recourse to wrath, desire etc., slavishly under the influence of one's own addiction and also without examining the cause, in named as a thing born of the Tamas (Strand).

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Viddhi, know; tat, that; jnanam, knowledge, realization of the Self as non-dual, complete realization; to be sattvikam, originating from sattva; yena, through which knowledge; iksate, one sees; ekam, a single; avyayam, undecaying-that which does not undergo mutation either in itself or by the mutation of its alities-' i.e. eternal and immutable; bhavam, Entity-the word bhava is used to imply an entity-, i.e. the single Reality which is the Self; sarvabhutesu, in all things, in all things begining from the Unmanifest to the unmoving things; and through which knowledge one sees that Entity to be avibhaktam, undivided; in every body, vibhaktesu, in all the deversified things, in the different bodies. The idea is: that Reality which is the Self remains, like Space, undivided.
Being based on rajas and tamas, those that are the dualistic philosophies are incomplete, and hence are not by themselves adeate for the eradication of worldly existence.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
The single immutable Reality in all beings is the Supreme Lord. Seeing the same Self in all distinct bodies is Sattvic knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Seeing the single, immutable Self in all beings, even during action, is Sattvic knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The realization of the non-dual, self-luminous Brahman, which is undivided and runs through all birth-and-death bound modifications of creation, is Sattvic knowledge. It leads to the eradication of samsara.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The knowledge by which one beholds the one undivided, immutable Paramatman in all beings, from Brahma down to unmoving things, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The non-dual realization of Upanishadic truth by which one perceives the undivided, indestructible Reality like space in all divided bodies is Sattvic knowledge.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
'Ekam' means unity of class or type, since multiplicity of souls is established. Seeing the self-same nature of knowledge (conscious nature) in all perishing bodies is Sattvic knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Beholding the one immutable Lord who plays in various names and forms is Sattvic knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Just as one sees gold in all different ornaments, seeing the single pure consciousness (Brahman) in all divided names and forms is Sattvic knowledge.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all living entities, though they are divided into innumerable forms, you should understand to be in the mode of goodness.

 A person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a demigod, human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possesses knowledge in the mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spirit soul is there, although they have different bodies in terms of their previous work. As described in the Seventh Chapter, the manifestation of the living force in every body is due to the superior nature of the Supreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature, that living force, in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living energy is imperishable, although the bodies are perishable. Differences are perceived in terms of the body; because there are many forms of material existence in conditional life, the living force appears to be divided. Such impersonal knowledge is an aspect of self-realization.