Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śarīravāṅmanobhiryatkarma prārabhate naraḥ .
nyāyyaṃ vā viparītaṃ vā pañcaite tasya hetavaḥ

Word Meanings:
शरीरवाङ्मनोभिः - by body
यत् - whatever
कर्म - action
प्रारभते - performs
नरः - man
न्याय्यम् - right
वा - or
विपरीतम् - the reverse
वा - or
पञ्च - five
एते - these
तस्य - its
हेतवः - causes.

Life Application:
Whatever action a man undertakes by body, speech, or mind, whether right or wrong, these five are its causes.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Whatever righteous (proper) or reverse (unrighteous) action a man performs with his body, speech, and mind, these five are its causes.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Whatever action a man performs with his body, speech and mind  whether right or the reverse  these five are its causes.

शरीरवाङ्मनोभिः by (his) body? speech and mind? यत् whatever? कर्म action? प्रारभते performs? नरः man? न्याय्यम् right? वा or? विपरीतम् the reverse? वा or? पञ्च five? एते these? तस्य its? हेतवः causes.Commentary Nyayyam Right Not opposed to Dharma conformable to the scriptures justifiable.Viparitam The opposite What is opposite to Dharma and opposed to the scriptures unjustifiable.Even those actions? -- acts like winking and the like which are necessary conditions of life? are indicated by the term the right and the reverse? as they are effects of past Dharma and Adharma.Tasya Hetavah Its Causes The causes of every action.An objector argues In the previous verse it is said that the body? actor? various organs? etc.? are the necessary factors of every action. Why do you then make a distinction in actions by saying whatever action a man does by the body? speech and mindOur answer is In the performance of every action? one of the three -- body? speech or mind -- has a more prominent share than the others while seeing? hearing and other activities which accompany or go along with life are subordinate to that one.Therefore all actions are classified under three groups and are spoken of as done by the body or speech or mind. The fruit of an actions also is enjoyed through the body? speech and mind and one of the three takes a more prominent share than the rest. Therefore? it is proper to say Whatever action a man performs with his body? speech and mind৷৷.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Whatever action a man performs, whether by muscular effort or by speech or by thought, and whether it be right or wrong, these five are the essential causes.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Just and reverse actions refer to actions that conform to or oppose Dharma respectively. Without exception, for the accomplishment of all types of actions, the five factors such as the body, etc., are required. An important point to note here is that the description of the fivefold causes of actions is only of the engine under the bonnet, not of the petrol. Without petrol, the engine cannot work, nor can a journey be successful and pleasant solely by petrol. By the relationship between the engine and the petrol, movement comes to the vehicle, and then the driver can take it to the destination according to the master's desire. On understanding this example, the meaning of Lord Krishna's statement will become clear. The actionless conscious Self, identifying with the limiting adjuncts like the body, etc., acts as the individual soul (jiva) and, motivated by various kinds of desires, performs proper and improper actions. For all these actions, the aforementioned five causes are required. The conclusion of the previous two verses is that man's pride of agency is false. The Lord says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O Arjuna !  Whatever action is undertaken with the body, speech or the mind, whether it is lawful or otherwise, its factors are these five.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
For whatever action a man undertakes by his body, speech and mind, whether right or wrong, i.e., enjoined or forbidden by the Sastras, the following five are its causes:

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Whatever action a man performs with the body, speech and mind, be it just or its reverse, of it these five are the cuases.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
"adhiṣṭhānam" is the body, etc. The doer (karta) is Vishnu, for He indeed is declared as the doer of all; and the proof for the non-agency of the individual self is also stated. "karanam" is the senses, etc. "ceṣṭāḥ" are activities; by activities like hands, etc., actions such as sacrifice, etc. are produced. Even for meditation (dhyana), etc., the mental function is the cause. The past function also becomes the cause of impressions (samskaras). "daivam" is destiny (adrishtam). And so says the Ayasya-sruti: "The body, Brahman, senses, etc., activities, and destiny as the fifth, are the causes of action."

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He clarifies that the five factors mentioned, such as the seat, etc., are for the accomplishment of all actions, in: "sarira...". Objection: "But there is another common action like winking, etc. performed by living beings; how is it classified into two groups (just and reverse)?" To this He answers: "and whatever..." etc. Objection: Having proposed that the seat, etc. are the causes of all actions in general, it is improper to state that they are the causes of threefold actions like bodily actions, etc. Thus he raises an objection in: "but..." etc. He refutes the contradiction between preceding and succeeding statements: "This fault does not arise". Raising the doubt: "Indeed, natural actions like seeing, etc. performed by living beings, being outside injunctions and prohibitions, are not produced by body, etc.", he says: "as subsidiaries to these". The meaning is: the eye, etc. are subsidiaries to the principal three, body, etc. Being accomplished by them, the natural activities of living beings like seeing, etc., are included in the principal actions, so the threefold classification is not contradictory. If all actions are included in the threefold action initiated by the body, etc., how are only the five factors like the seat, etc., the causes there, since other causes might be required at the time of experiencing the fruit? Raising this doubt, he refutes it by saying that all causes existing at the time of birth and experiencing the fruit are included in those very factors: "at the time of reaping the fruits..." etc.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Whatever scripturally ordained or scripturally forbidden action a man undertakes through body, speech, and mind, these (aforementioned) five are its causes. Commentary — śarīravāṅmanobhiryatkarma... pañcaite tasya hetavaḥ — The five causes like seat, etc., which were stated in the previous (14th) verse for the performance of actions, are included in these words. For instance, the word body (sarira) includes the seat (adhishthana); the word speech (vac) includes the external instruments; the word mind (manas) includes the internal instruments; the word man (narah) includes the doer; and the word undertakes (prarabhate) includes the functions of all the organs. Now, as for destiny (daivam), this destiny, i.e., impressions, resides only in the mind, but it is not clearly perceived. It is known only through the thoughts generated by it and the actions performed accordingly. Whatever action a man undertakes with body, speech, and mind — i.e., performing actions sometimes with the predominance of the body, sometimes with the predominance of speech, and sometimes with the predominance of the mind — whether it is righteous — scripturally ordained, or reverse — scripturally forbidden, these five causes (mentioned in the previous verse) are present in it. All actions are performed only through these three — body, speech, and mind. The actions performed by these are designated as physical, vocal, and mental actions. Bondage occurs only when impurity enters these three. Therefore, for the purification of these three (body, speech, and mind), physical, vocal, and mental penance are described respectively in the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth verses of the seventeenth chapter. The implication is that no scripturally forbidden action should be performed through body, speech, and mind, but only scripturally ordained actions should be performed; then it becomes penance. In the seventeenth verse of the seventeenth chapter itself, by using the word "afalākāṅkṣibhiḥ" (by those not desiring fruits), it is shown that penance performed with a desireless attitude is Sattvik. Sattvik penance does not bind, but rather leads to liberation. But Rajasik and Tamasik penances are binding. Impurity enters these bodies, speech, etc. only when one considers them as one's own and performs actions for oneself. Therefore, without purifying them, though the principles of Sankhya may be understood through reason by intellect alone, yet the clear realization: "I have not the slightest connection with actions" cannot arise. Under such circumstances, if the seeker does not consider the body, etc., as his own and does not perform any action for himself, then the body, etc., will be purified very quickly. Therefore, whether he purifies them from the perspective of Karma-yoga and severs connection with them, or severs connection with them through strong discrimination from the perspective of Sankhya-yoga; by both means, the assumed relationship with Nature and the effects of Nature is severed, and the true Reality is experienced. By the same cosmic energy (samashti-shakti) by which all activities of the universe occur, the activities of the individual (vyashti) body also happen naturally. Due to not giving importance to discrimination, when one considers himself the doer of those activities like eating, drinking, sitting, rising, sleeping, waking, etc., then there is accumulation of actions (karma-sangraha), i.e., those activities become binding. But where one does not consider himself the doer, there is no accumulation of actions. There, only activity occurs. Therefore, those activities are not productive of fruit, i.e., they are not binding. For example, growing from childhood to youth, breathing, digestion of food, formation of vital fluids, etc., happen automatically and naturally through Nature without the pride of agency, and there is no accumulation of action, i.e., no sin or virtue, from them. Similarly, when the pride of agency is absent, it is clearly experienced that all activities are performed only by Nature. Connection — The purpose of showing the five causes for the performance of actions in the introduction to the Sankhya principles is described by the Lord in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
For all actions, performed through body, words or mind, whether they be authorized by the Sastras or not, the causes are these five. (1) The body, which is a conglomeration of the 'great elements,' is known as the seat, since it is governed by the individual self. (2) The agent is the individual self. That this individual self is the knower and the agent is established in the Vedanta-Sutras:  'For this reason, (the individual self) is the knower' (2.3.18) and 'The agent, on account of the scripture having a purport' (2.3.33.). (3) The organs of various kinds are the five motor organs like that of speech, hands, feet etc., along with the mind. They are of various kinds, viz., they have different functions in completing an action. (4) The different and distinctive functions of vital air - here the expression 'functions' (Cesta) means several functions. Distinctive are the functions of this fivefold vital air which sustains the body and senses through its divisions of Prana, Apana etc. (5) Divinity is the fifth among these causes. The purport is this:  Among these, which constitute the conglomeration of causes of work the Divinity is the fifth. It is the Supreme Self, the Inner Ruler, who is the main cause in completing the action.

It has been already affirmed:  'I am seated in the hearts of all. From Me are memory, knowledge and their removal also' (15.15), and He will say further:  'The Lord, O Arjuna, lives in the heart of every being casuing them to spin round and round by His power as if set on a wheel' (18.61). The agency of the individual self is dependent on the Supreme Self as established in the aphorism:  'But from the Supreme, because the scripture says so' (B. S., 2.3.41).

Now an objection may be raised in this way:  If the agency of the individual self is dependent on the Supreme Self and the individual self cannot be charged with moral responsibility, then the scriptures containing injunctions and prohibitions become useless, as the individual self cannot be enjoined to act in regard to any action. The objection is disposed off by the author of the Vedanta-Sutras in the aphorism:  'But with a view to the effects made on account of the purposelessness of injunctions and prohibitions' (2.3.42).

The purport is this:  By means of his senses, body etc., granted by the Supreme Self - having Him for their support, empowered by Him, and thus deriving power from Him - the individual self begins, of his own free will, the effort for directing the senses etc., for the purpose of performing actions conditioned by his body and organs. The individual self Itself, of Its own free will, is responsible for activity, since the Supreme Self, abiding within, causes It to act only by granting His permission, just as works such as moving heavy stones and timber are collectively the labour of many persons and they are together responsible for the effect. But each one of them (severally) also is responsible for it. In the same way each individual is answerable to Nature's law in the form of positive and negative ?ndments.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.13–18.17 jointly): Panca etc. upto na nibadhyate Conclusion :  the established end, because here a decision is arrived at.  Basis : the material object Destiny :  the good and  bad result  [of actions] previously accumulated.  These five viz., the basis etc., constitute the entire assembly of factors and hence they are the causes for each action.
 
But other [commentators give an etymology of]  adhisthana 'basis' to mean 'That by which all actions are governed'; and on that ground they believe that it denotes that action which exists in the intellect; which comes ot be due to the Rajas, and is being prone to transform itself into the pentad of (the mental dispositions viz.)  the content, the faith, the happiness, the desire to know and the aversion to know; which is referable by the term karma-yoga  (that which yokes man into activity); and which is described at times by the term prayatna 'effort'.
 
Agent :  the ascertainer characterised by the intellect.  Instrument :  [the personal instruments viz.] the mind, the eye etc., and also the external ones like sword etc.  Activity :  the activity of  upper life-breath, nether life-breath etc.  The effects of the righteous and unrighteous acts are indicated by the term Destiny.  All the dispositions located in the intellect are indicated by these two.  Still other commentators, however, take Basis to be the Absolute Lord.
 
Due to his  imperfect intellect :  because of his having indecisive  knowledge.  But he, who performs actions with the stability due to disappearance of th I-sense  (limited) and  [a stability] refined by hundreds of reasoning, as detailed earlier - he does not get the fetter, because he is a man of perfect intellect.  This is what is intended  [in the passage under study].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yat, whatever; karma, action; narah, a man; prarabhate, performs; with these three-sarira-van-manobhih, with the body, speech and mind; be it nyayyam, just, rigtheous, conforming to the scriptures; va, or; viparitam, its reverse, not conforming to the scriptures, unrighteous; and even such activities like closing the eyes etc. whch are conseent on the fact of living (i.e. instinctive acts)-they also are certainly the result of righteous and unrighteous acts done in earlier lives, and hence they are understood by the very, use of the words 'just and its reverse'-; tasya, of it, of all activities without exception; ete, these; panca, five, as mentioned; are the hetavah, causes.
Objection: Well, are not the locus etc. the cause of all actions? Why is it said, '৷৷.performs with the body, speech and mind'?
Reply: This fault does not arise. All actions described as 'enjoined' or 'prohibited' are mainly based on the three, body etc. Seeing, hearing, etc., which are characteristics of life and are subsidiaries to these (body etc.) [Seeing etc. are accomplished by the eye etc., which are part and parcel of the body etc.] , are divided into three groups and spoken of in, 'performs with the body,' etc. Even at the time of reaping the fruits (of actions), they are experienced mainly through these (three). Hence, there is no contradiction with the assertion that the five are the causes.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
He will say that the seat, etc. are indeed included in the instruments; to make that understood, he indicates the seat in: "adhisthanam...". By "etc.", earth, etc. are meant. With the intent that the explanation "the doer is the individual self" is incorrect, he says: "the doer...". To the question: "How is Vishnu the doer of actions performed through body, speech, and mind?", he says: "He indeed...". This has been stated and established. Even so, why should the individual self not be the doer here? To this he says: "and of the individual self...". This refutation is with the intent of independent agency; since dependent agency of the individual self is admitted and explained elsewhere, there is no contradiction. To refute the appearance of the instrument being the act itself, he says: "instrument...". By "etc.", ladle, etc. are meant. Because that which denotes the act itself is what is to be accomplished, and it is already grasped by the inclusion of effort (cheshta). The explanation (of Shankara), "the functions of vital airs like prana, apana, etc. are the functions (cheshta)", is incorrect. Because if a substance (air) is denoted, it cannot properly be a function. And if breathing, etc. are denoted, they are what are to be accomplished, hence they cannot properly be the factor of action (karaka). With this intent he says: "activities...". To the question: "Since activities are what accomplish action, how are they factors?", he says: "by hands, etc.". Indeed, an instrument containing subordinate activity is called a factor. Therein, by words like seat, etc., the agents of activity are indicated, whereas by the word activity, the subordinate activities are indicated. The meaning is: the generation of the principal action by subordinate activities resting on the factors is indeed well-known. Objection: "But here, in the context of declaring the factors, only the seat, etc. are mentioned; why are the object (karma), recipient (sampradana), and starting point (apadana) not mentioned?" We reply: "Because the seat, etc. follow all actions, whereas the object, etc. do not." And so He will say: "Whatever action a man undertakes through body, speech, and mind..." (Gita 18.15). If so, then effort (cheshta) also should not be mentioned, because in producing meditation, etc., the instrument (mind) has no physical effort. To this he says: "even for meditation, etc." By "etc.", remembering is grasped; meditation occurs only on an object already known; and knowledge arises only by the mind in contact with the Self and senses, and contact is generated by mental effort; therefore, the effort related to the mind is the cause even of meditation, etc. This is the idea. Objection: "But a cause is that which is invariably antecedent; and in the moment preceding meditation, there is no activity in the mind because it has long passed, since meditation is accomplished by the stillness of the mind. Nor is it the instrument through contact and knowledge, because that too has long passed." To this he says: "past...". The meaning is: the past mental activity, even though long passed, becomes through contact the cause of the impression which is the cause of meditation, etc., because the impression which is the cause of meditation, etc. is stable. Some say that "daivam" is the activity of the Inner Ruler; that is incorrect, because it is already stated by "doer". Others say that it is the Sun, etc. who are the presiding deities of the eye, etc. That too is incorrect, because they are already grasped by the words instrument, etc. With this intent he says: "daivam is destiny (adrishtam)". He supports the stated meaning by the authority of the Sruti also: "And so...". "Body" is illustrative. "Factor" (hetu) means cause. In the reading "karma hetu", there is a Vedic variation of gender.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
To explain, "adhiṣṭhānam...". For all actions performed through body, speech, and mind, whether they be scriptural (proper) or opposite (prohibited), these five are the causes. He states them: The seat (adhishthana) is the first cause, the body; the doer (karta) is the individual self associated with egoism, who is the knower, as established in the aphorism: "The agent, on account of the scripture having a purport" (Brahma Sutras 2.3.33); the instrument (karanam) is of various kinds, consisting of the mind, eyes, ears, etc. divided into organs of knowledge and action; the distinct activities (cheshtah) are the functions of vital airs, etc., which are the causes in action according to the nature of the work; and destiny (daivam) is the fifth, which is destiny (adrishtam) according to some (the followers of Madhva). But in reality, it means the Supreme, in the form of the Inner Ruler, who completes the number five and is the principal cause in the performance of all actions. For the glory of His own nature abiding within was stated before by the Lord, the Supreme Person: "seated in the hearts of all" (Gita 13.17). And it was also said by the revered preceptor (Vallabha): "In reality, there is no divinity higher than Krishna, who is free from all defects." And in the aphorisms also, the agency of the individual self, body, senses, etc. which is dependent on Him, the Inner Self, is established: "And as the carpenter in both ways" (Brahma Sutras 2.3.40). Here, the commentator (Vallabha) says: "Objection: Since the distinction of agency and experiencing is seen in the case of performers of action, there will indeed be a difference between agency and experiencing. No, just as a carpenter, having built a chariot, mounts it and sports, or does not act on a wooden seat by himself but through tools like an adze, and by the word 'and', others are agents for their own sake. If it is said that he acts for the sake of another also, in the present case too, it is because He strives for the welfare of all. And agency itself is not of the nature of pain, because activities like drinking milk are of the nature of pleasure. Thus, agency and causing to act for one's own sake and for another's sake are established. And further: 'But from the Supreme, because the scripture says so' (Brahma Sutras 2.3.41). Agency belongs to Brahman alone; the agency of the individual self is only due to connection with Him, on account of being His part, like lordship, etc. It does not belong to the insentient alone. Therefore, passages like 'There is no other seer than He' (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 3.7.23) show that His all-agency is reasonable. Why is this? From the scripture, because He alone is heard to be the doer and the causer of action: 'He makes him perform good action whom He wishes to lead up, and He makes him perform bad action whom He wishes to lead down.' He is the doer of all, the enjoyer of all, and the ruler of all; since He is of the form of all, there is no defect in the Lord. And so says the aphorism: 'But with a view to the effort made, on account of the purposelessness of injunctions and prohibitions' (Brahma Sutras 2.3.42). Objection: 'There is no refutation of partiality and cruelty, because due to beginninglessness He alone is the causer of action.' The word 'but' (tu) refutes this view. The effort up to the final stage is the act of the individual self, and since it is impossible for him beyond that, He Himself causes him to act. Just as a father, even while describing the qualities and defects of an object to his striving son or child, seeing his persistence in effort, makes him act in that very manner. To be the cause everywhere, He restates the desire that exists at the time of giving fruits in: 'He wishes to lead up, He wishes to lead down'. Otherwise, there would be the uselessness and unauthoritativeness of injunctions and prohibitions. To protect the law of order: 'In giving fruits, He depends on action; in the cause of action, He depends on effort; in desire, He depends on the flow', He created the Vedas. Therefore, there is not even a scent of defect in Brahman, nor is there lack of lordship, because in the path of law it is determined in that very manner. Where it is otherwise, that is in the path of grace (Pushti).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He elaborates on the aforementioned causality of the five factors in: "sarira...". Whatever action, righteous conforming to the scriptures, or reverse forbidden by the scriptures and unrighteous, or any activity whatsoever, a man undertakes with body, speech, and mind, for all that activity, these five as mentioned are the causes. Objection: "Is this not contradictory to the preceding statement? Previously, five causes were stated for all actions; but here, five causes are stated for action undertaken with body, speech, and mind. And indeed, all actions are not undertaken only by the three like the body, etc., because many other activities like seeing, hearing, etc. are observed." Reply: No. Because even the natural activities like seeing, etc., which are characteristics of life, are included in them as they are subsidiaries to the enjoined and prohibited actions accomplished by the three, body, etc. And since the experiencing of fruits is accomplished by the principal instruments of the three, body, etc., the inclusion of all activities in the three groups of physical, vocal, and mental is reasonable. Therefore, "whatever action with body, speech, and mind" is illustrative of all activities. Thus, there is no contradiction between the preceding and succeeding statements.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
"sarira...". Having stated the two kinds of action undertaken with body, speech, and mind, namely just and reverse, He clarifies that even therein, these five alone are the causes in: "with body, speech...". He states that even distinct activities such as winking, etc. which are the causes of life are included in these two, in: "whatever action...". Objection: "But only the five factors like the seat, etc. were stated as the causes of all actions; there, the statement of threefold division like bodily, etc. is improper due to the possibility of contradiction." To this He replies: "right or...". The idea is this: although the five factors like the seat, etc. are the causes, yet all actions generated by them are indeed of three kinds divided into physical, vocal, and mental; hence there is no contradiction.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Objection: "But in the previous verse, five causes were stated for all actions; here, however, five causes are stated for action undertaken with body, speech, and mind. And indeed, all actions are not undertaken only by body, speech, and mind, because many other activities like seeing, hearing, etc. exist." Reply: True. Because even those specific activities which are characteristics of life are included in them as they are subsidiaries to the enjoined and prohibited actions accomplished by the three, body, etc. And since at the time of experiencing the fruits also, they are accomplished by the principal instruments of the three, body, etc., the inclusion of all activities in the three groups of physical, vocal, and mental is reasonable. Therefore, with the intent that "whatever action a man undertakes with body, speech, and mind" is illustrative of all actions, he explains the verse: "sarira..." etc. The text: "and even that..." etc. means that they are included in just and reverse only. The idea is that even illustration does not culminate without connection to the specific object intended. To avoid the objection of contradiction in the two words "and" (ca) which combine the presiding deities like the Sun, etc. and destiny (adrishtam) in the form of virtue and vice, he says in the second view, keeping in mind that destiny is more intimate than grace: "destiny (daivam) indeed..." etc. The word "or" (va) is for the purpose of combining other causes.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In the words "with body, speech, and mind", to show that the terms just and reverse fall within the scope of following or transgressing limits, he says: "just is scripturally ordained". "righteous" is the resulting statement. Objection: "Since specific activities like winking, etc. are not included here, how can the five factors be the causes of all actions?" To this he says: "and even that..." etc. The idea is: since that also results in pleasure, pain, etc., its being caused by destiny (adrishtam) is no different; hence it is included in the just and reverse which are illustrated by it. Objection: Raising the doubt of contradiction between the statement that all actions are accomplished by the five causes, and the specification "whatever action a man undertakes with body, speech, and mind", he says: "but...". He explains the refutation of contradiction: "This fault does not arise". The idea is: although all actions are accomplished by the five factors, yet the principal assembly of actions being performed in the form of ordained, etc. is indeed included in the three; hence there is no contradiction. He refutes the doubt of winking, etc. being excluded: "as subsidiaries to these". The meaning is: the eye, etc. are subsidiaries to the three like physical, etc., because they are generated by them. He states that because the three like physical, etc. are principal even in experiencing, other activities are included in them, in: "at the time of reaping the fruits...". With the intent that only the causality of the five is expounded in "these five are its causes", he says: "of the five...". The refutation of the uselessness of injunctions and prohibitions through the impossibility of giving permission is explained.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Showing the causality of these five factors, He states that actions also are of three kinds divided into physical, etc. and of two kinds divided into just, etc. in: "sarira...". The meaning is: whatever action, just, i.e., scripturally ordained, or reverse, i.e., scripturally forbidden, is undertaken by a man, for all that, these five alone are the causes.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Objection: "But there is a common action like winking, etc. which is a characteristic of life; are these factors the causes for that too?" To this He answers in: "whatever...". Just is scripturally ordained; reverse is scripturally forbidden. With the intent that by grasping these two, even worldly action is included, he says: "whatever activity a man undertakes with body, speech, and mind, for that these five are the causes."

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech is caused by these five factors.

 The words “right” and “wrong” are very significant in this verse. Right work is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in the scriptures, and wrong work is work done against the principles of the scriptural injunctions. But whatever is done requires these five factors for its complete performance.