Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sve sve karmaṇyabhirataḥ saṃsiddhiṃ labhate naraḥ .
svakarmanirataḥ siddhiṃ yathā vindati tacchṛṇu

Word Meanings:
स्वे स्वे - each devoted to his own
कर्मणि - in duty
अभिरतः - engaged / devoted
संसिद्धिम् - highest perfection
लभते - attains
नरः - a man
स्वकर्मनिरतः - devoted to one's own duty
सिद्धिम् - perfection
यथा - as / how
विन्दति - attains
तत् - that
शृणु - hear

Life Application:
Each person devoted to his own natural duty attains perfection; hear how one attains perfection by duty.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Devoted each to his own duty, man attains perfection; how one devoted to one's own duty attains perfection, that do thou hear.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He who does actions, offering them to Brahman, and abandoning attachment, is not tainted by sin, just as a lotus-leaf is not tainted by water.

ब्रह्मणि in Brahman? आधाय having placed? कर्माणि actions? सङ्गम् attachment? त्यक्त्वा having abandoned? करोति acts? यः who? लिप्यते is tainted? न not? सः he? पापेन by sin? पद्मपत्रम् lotusleaf? इव like? अम्भसा by water.Commentary Chapter IV verses 18? 20? 21? 22? 23? 37? 41 Chapter V verses 10? 11 and 12 all convey the one idea that the Yogi who does actions without egoism and attachment to results or fruits of the actions? which he regards as offerings unto the Lord? is not tainted by the actions (Karma). He has no attachment even for Moksha. He sees inaction in action. All his actions are burnt in the fire of wisdom. He escapes from the wheel of Samsara. He is freed from the round of births and deaths. He gets purity of heart and through purity of heart attains to the knowledge of the Self. Through the knowledge of the Self he is liberated. This is the gist of the above ten verses. (Cf.III.30)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
He who dedicates his actions to the Spirit, without any personal attachment to them, he is no more tainted by sin than the water lily is wetted by water.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Devoted to his own duty, man attains perfection. Listen how he who is devoted to his own duty attains perfection. Commentary: By dedicating oneself to one's own duty (Svadharma), which is aligned with one's Gunas and temperament, one purifies the mind. When work is performed as a dedication to the Lord, the ego dissolves, and the mind is prepared for contemplation and Self-realization.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Who performs actions by offering them to the Brahman and giving up attachment-he is not stained by sin just as the lotus-leaf is  [not stained]  by water.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who acts without attachment, reposing all actions on Brahman (Prakrti), is untouched by evil, as a lotus-leaf by water.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
One who acts by dedicating actions to Brahman and by renouncing attachment, he does not become polluted by sin, just as a lotus leaf is not by water.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
By dedication to one's own duty, man attains spiritual perfection. Listen now to the method by which a man devoted to his own duty attains this perfection.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Devoted each to his own duty, man attains perfection; how one devoted to one's own duty attains perfection, that do thou hear.

Commentary: When a person performs their natural duty (Svadharma) without desire for reward and offers the actions to God, they attain the highest perfection. The Lord now explains how performing one's natural duty is actually a form of worship and path to liberation.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Here the term, Brahman denotes Prakrti. Later on Sri Krsna will say:  'The great Brahman is My womb' (14.3). Since Prakrti abides in the form of senses which are particular off-shoots of Prakrti, he who, as said in the passage beginning with 'Even though he is seeing, hearing ৷৷.' (5.8), understands that all actions proceed from Brahman (Prakrti); renounces all attachment while engaging himself in all actions, reflecting, 'I am doing nothing.' Such a person, though existing in contact with Prakrti, is not contaminated by sin which is the result of the wrong identification of the Atman with Prakrti and is the cause of bondage. Just as a lotus leaf is not wetted by water, actions do not affect or defile a person with sin, if he is free from such identification with the body.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
On the other hand, again, one who is ignorant of the Truth and is engaged in Karma-yoga, yah, who; karoti, acts; adhaya, by dedicating, by surrendering; all karmani, actions; brahmani, to Brahman, to God; with the idea, 'I am working for Him, as a servant does everything for his master', and tyaktva, by renouncing; sangam, attachment, even with regard to teh resulting Liberation; sah, he; na lipyate, does not get polluted, is not affected; papena, by sin; iva, just as; padma-patram, a lotus leaf; is not ambhasa, by water.
The only result that will certainly accrue from such action will be the purification of the heart.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Devoted each to his own duty, which is the path of action, man attains perfection. Hear now how one devoted to his own duty attains perfection.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Devoted each to his own natural duty, man attains perfection (purification of the intellect and fitness for knowledge). Hear now how one devoted to his own duty attains this perfection.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Devoted each to his own natural duty, man attains perfection (fitness for knowledge). Hear now how one devoted to his own duty attains perfection.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Devoted each to his own natural duty, man attains perfection. Hear now how one devoted to his own duty attains this perfection.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Devoted each to his own natural duty, man attains perfection. Hear now how one devoted to his own duty attains this perfection.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Devoted each to his own natural duty, man attains perfection. Hear now how one devoted to his own duty attains this perfection.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Devoted each to his own natural duty, man attains perfection. Hear now how one devoted to his own duty attains this perfection.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now please hear from Me how this can be done.

There is no purport for this verse