Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
tameva śaraṇaṃ gaccha sarvabhāvena bhārata .
tatprasādātparāṃ śāntiṃ sthānaṃ prāpsyasi śāśvatam

Word Meanings:
तम् - to Him
एव - even
शरणम् गच्छ - take refuge
सर्वभावेन - with all thy being
भारत - O Bharata
तत्प्रसादात् - by His grace
पराम् - supreme
शान्तिम् - peace
स्थानम् - the abode
प्राप्स्यसि - shalt obtain
शाश्वतम् - eternal.

Life Application:
Take refuge in God alone with all your heart; by divine grace you will attain supreme peace and eternal abode.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Surrender unto Him alone with all your heart, O Bharata. By His grace you shall attain supreme peace and the eternal abode.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Fly unto Him for refuge with all thy being, O Arjuna; by His grace thou shalt obtain supreme peace (and) the eternal abode.

तम् to Him? एव even? शरणम् गच्छ take refuge? सर्वभावेन with all thy being? भारत O Bharata? तत्प्रसादात् by His grace? पराम् supreme? शान्तिम् peace? स्थानम् the abode? प्राप्स्यसि (thou) shalt obtain? शाश्वतम् eternal.Commentary Do total and perfect surrender to the Lord. Do not keep any secret desires for silent gratification. Desire and egoism are the two chief obstacles that stand in the way of selfsurrender. Kill them ruthlessly.Run to the Lord for shelter with all thy being for freeing thyself from the troubles? afflictions and sorrows of Samsara. Take the Lord as the sole refuge. Then by His grace? thou shalt obtain supreme peace and attain to the supreme? eternal Abode.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
With all thy strength, fly unto Him and surrender thyself, and by His grace shalt thou attain Supreme Peace and reach the Eternal Home.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In short, Lord Krishna's point is: 'I am not forcing you to fight out of lack of sympathy, but because there is no other way left for you. You have no choice. Although you stubbornly claim you will not fight, this is only your delusion and confusion. You will have to fight because your nature will compel you.' The Lord repeatedly advises to remember Him. How should we remember God? What should be our relationship with Him? These questions of an earnest seeker are answered in the next verse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
To Him alone you must go for refuge with all your thought,  O descendant of Bharata !  Through My Grace you will attain the success, the eternal abode.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Seek refuge in Him alone, O Arjuna, with the whole of your being. By His grace, you shall find supreme peace and eternal abode.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Take refuge in Him alone with your whole being, O scion of the Bharata dynasty. Through His grace you will attain the supreme Peace and the eternal Abode.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Take refuge in that very Lord with all your heart and soul. By His grace, you will obtain supreme peace, i.e., quietude or Samadhi (as stated in the Yoga-sutra: 'Samadhi is attained by devotion to God'). You will also attain the supreme, eternal, and everlasting abode, which is the state of Vishnu, or liberation.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Surrender unto Him alone with all your heart, O Bharata. By His grace you shall attain supreme peace and the eternal abode.

Commentary: Since the Lord is the sole regulator of all living beings, the only way to get free from the bondage of nature (prakriti) is to take complete refuge in Him. One should surrender all actions, thoughts, and will to the Lord residing in the heart. By doing so, the Lord's divine grace (Prasada) flows naturally, bringing supreme peace (freedom from material worries) and establishing the soul in the eternal, imperishable state (liberation).

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Such being the case, take refuge with all your heart (Sarvabhavena), by every disposition of your body, senses and mind (Sarvatmana) in Him - Him, the ruler of all, who has become your charioteer out of compassion for dependents, and who orders you, 'Act thus' and so on. Even if you do not do so now, fighting in battle etc., is inevitable for you who are ignorant and actuated by His Maya, but then you will get ruined. Therefore, fight etc., in the manner which has been explained by Him. Such is the meaning.

Acting in this way, you will attain supreme peace, release from all bondage, and the eternal abode. Hundreds of Srutis declare it:  'That supreme place of Visnu which the sages see' (Rg. S., 1.2.6.5); 'They become meritorious and reach this heaven where Devas and Sadhyas dwell' (Tai. A., 3.12); 'Where dwell the ancient sages, the first-born' (Tai.Sam., 4.7.13.1); 'The supreme place above the paradise in the heart of the Supreme Heaven' (Ma. Na., 8.14); 'He who is in the Supreme Heaven and presides over this' (Rg. S., 8.7.17.7); 'Now that light which shines above this Supreme Heaven' (Cha. U., 3.13.7); and 'He reaches the end of the journey, the Highest abode of Visnu' (Ka. U., 3.9).

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.61–18.62 jointly): The Supreme Lord dwells in the heart of all beings, directing their wanderings through His Maya as though mounted on a machine. Surrender unto Him alone with all thy being, O Bharata; by His grace shalt thou attain supreme peace and the eternal abode.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Gaccha saranam, take refuge; tam eva, in Him, the Lord alone; sarva-bhavena, with your whole being, for getting rid of your mundane sufferings, O scion of the Bharata dynasty. Tat-prasadat, through His grace, through God's grace; prapsyasi, you will attain; param, the supreme; santim, Peace, the highest Tranillity; and the sasvatam, eternal; sthanam, Abode, the supreme State of Mine who am Visnu.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
In verses like 'The Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings' (18.61) and 'Go to Him for refuge... by His grace', the third-person usage (parioksha-vacana) might suggest that Krishna is not the Supreme Lord Himself. To reject this view, the commentary states that such indirect expressions have a different intended purpose and do not denote a division between Krishna and Ishvara.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Therefore, surrender completely (with all your being) to Him alone, the controller and Lord of all, who is the only refuge. Otherwise, driven by My material nature, fighting will become inevitable for you anyway; hence, performing actions according to My words is better. By My grace alone, you will attain supreme peace and the eternal abode. Thus, performing one's natural duty under the Lord's command is the approved path; doing so prevents any bondage for the devotee. This is the conclusion.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Tameva...': Since you are dependent on the Lord, therefore surrender to Him alone, who is Ishvara, with all your heart and soul, through body, speech, and mind. O Bharata, by His grace, the grace of that Supreme Lord, you will attain supreme peace characterized by the quietude of the mind and cessation of transmigratory existence, and you will also attain the supreme, eternal abode, which is the state of Vishnu.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Since it is so, therefore—'tameva...': go for refuge to Him alone, the Lord, with all your being (sarva-bhavena). O Bharata, by His grace, you will attain supreme peace characterized by the pacification of attraction and aversion, and the eternal abode in the form of liberation.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Since you are thus dependent, therefore—'tameva...': go for refuge to Him alone, the Lord residing in the hearts of all beings. How? With all your heart and soul, through body, speech, and mind, O Bharata. Do not consider anyone else as your refuge. By His grace, the grace of that Lord, you will attain supreme peace characterized by the cessation of attraction and aversion, and the eternal and everlasting abode of Vishnu.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
'Tameva...': The Lord instructs Arjuna to take refuge in Him, the Supreme Controller Vasudeva, with all his heart and soul. Taking refuge 'with all your being' means with all thoughts, words, and deeds dedicated to Him. Through His grace, you will obtain supreme peace (freedom from all binding karmas) and the eternal abode, which is the state of Vishnu, also referred to as the supreme place of liberation. This means you will be freed from transmigratory existence and established in His eternal service.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
'Tameva...': The Lord says that if you do not understand Me and do not obey My command directly, then go for refuge to that very Lord who resides in your heart. O Bharata, you who are free from egoism due to being born in a noble lineage! Surrendering all doubts and determinations, take refuge in Him alone with all your heart and soul. Then, by His grace, you will attain supreme peace and the eternal, everlasting abode which is characterized by the imperishable (Akshara) state mentioned in the previous verse.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Take refuge in that very Lord with all your heart and soul. By His grace, you will obtain supreme peace, i.e., quietude or Samadhi (as stated in the Yoga-sutra: 'Samadhi is attained by devotion to God'). You will also attain the supreme, eternal, and everlasting abode, which is the state of Vishnu, or liberation.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.

 A living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone’s heart, and that will relieve him from all kinds of miseries of this material existence. By such surrender, not only will one be released from all miseries in this life, but at the end he will reach the Supreme God. The transcendental world is described in the Vedic literature ( Ṛg Veda 1.22.20) as tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. Since all of creation is the kingdom of God, everything material is actually spiritual, but paramaṁ padam specifically refers to the eternal abode, which is called the spiritual sky or Vaikuṇṭha. In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā it is stated, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ: the Lord is seated in everyone’s heart. So this recommendation that one should surrender unto the Supersoul sitting within means that one should surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has already been accepted by Arjuna as the Supreme. He was accepted in the Tenth Chapter as paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma. Arjuna has accepted Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the supreme abode of all living entities, not only because of his personal experience but also because of the evidence of great authorities like Nārada, Asita, Devala and Vyāsa.