Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
buddhyā viśuddhayā yukto dhṛtyātmānaṃ niyamya ca .
śabdādīnviṣayāṃstyaktvā rāgadveṣau vyudasya ca

Word Meanings:
बुद्ध्या - with an intellect
विशुद्धया - pure
युक्तः - endowed
धृत्या - by firmness
आत्मानम् - the self
नियम्य - controlling
च - and
शब्दादीन् - sound and other
विषयान् - senseobjects
त्यक्त्वा - having abandoned
रागद्वेषौ - attraction and hatred
व्युदस्य - abandoning
च - and.

Life Application:
Endowed with pure intellect, controlling self with fortitude, abandoning sound/sense objects, casting aside attraction and hatred...

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Endowed with a pure intellect, subduing the mind and body with firmness, renouncing sound and other sense objects, and casting aside attachment and hatred...

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Endowed with a pure intellect, controlling the self by firmness, relinishing sound and other objects and abandoning attraction and hatred.

बुद्ध्या with an intellect? विशुद्धया pure? युक्तः endowed? धृत्या by firmness? आत्मानम् the self? नियम्य controlling? च and? शब्दादीन् sound and other? विषयान् senseobjects? त्यक्त्वा relinishing? रागद्वेषौ attraction and hatred? व्युदस्य abandoning? च and.Commentary The lower self should be controlled with firmness by the Self of pure intellect. The turbulent senses and the mind should be subdued with the help of the pure intellect or reason. Pure reason is a great power. Whenever the senses raise their heads and hiss? they should be hammered by the powerful rod of pure intellect or reason. Reason is the faculty of determination.Pure intellect The intellect that is free from lust? anger? greed? pride? doubt? misconception? etc. It is like a clear mirror. A pure intellect is Brahman Itself. It can be easily merged in Brahman. When the pure intellect is merged in Brahman? the reflected intelligence? Chidabhasa or Jiva? is also absorbed in Brahman. The Jiva becomes identical with Brahman? just as the ether in the pot becomes one with the universal ether when the pot is broken.The self The aggregate of the body and the senses.The aspirant withdraws the senses from their respective objects again and again through the repeated practice of Pratyahara (abstraction) and Dama (selfrestraint). Gradually the senses are fixed in the Self. Their outgoing tendencies are totally curbed. The aspirant attains supreme control of the senses by constant meditation? by the practice of dispassion he coners Raga (attachment)? and through the practice of pure love or cosmic love or divine Preme he coners hatred.He abandons all luxuries. He keeps only those objects which are necessary for the bare maintenance of the body. He has neither attachment nor hatred even for those objects which are necessary for that purpose.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Guided always by pure reason, bravely restraining himself, renouncing the objects of sense and giving up attachment and hatred;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Endowed with a pure intellect, subduing the self with firmness, renouncing sound and other sense-objects, and casting aside attachment and hatred. Commentary: Pure intellect is one free from cravings for sensory enjoyment. To prepare for meditation, the seeker must restrain the mind using sattvik fortitude, preventing the memory of past enjoyments from disturbing inner peace. Even if the senses encounter objects (sound, touch, etc.), the seeker should not start dwelling on them, which is possible only when one is free from personal likes (Raga) and dislikes (Dvesha).

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
He, who has got a totally pure intellect by fully controlling his self (mind) with firmness, and renouncing sense-objects, sound etc., and driving out desire and hatred;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Endowed by a purified understanding, subduing the mind by steadiness, relinishing sound and other objectts of the senses and casting aside love and hate;

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Being endowed with a pure intellect, and controlling oneself with fortitude, rejecting the objects-beginning from sound [Sound, touch, form and colour, taste and smell.-Tr.], and eliminating attachment and hatred;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Being endowed with a pure intellect free from doubt and delusion, subduing the aggregate of body and senses with fortitude, and abandoning the sense-objects like sound etc., which are not necessary for the maintenance of the body, as well as attraction and hatred toward them...

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Endowed with a pure intellect, subduing the mind and body with firmness, renouncing sound and other sense-objects, and casting aside attraction and hatred...

Commentary: The seeker of the path of knowledge must possess a purified sattvik intellect that has clear discriminative power. Using firmness, he subdues the outgoing tendencies of his senses and body, ensuring that no action goes against his spiritual practice. He renounces all external relationships and sensory pleasures (sound, touch, etc.) during meditation, and remains free from attraction and hatred, which are the root causes of worldly bondage.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Endowed with a purified understanding' means endowed with the Buddhi capable of understanding the self as it is in reality; 'subduing the mind by steadiness' means making the mind fit for meditation by turning away from external and internal objects; 'relinishing sound and other objects of senses' means keeping them far away, casting aside love and hate occasioned by them (i.e., the sense objects).

'Resorting to solitude' means living in a lonely place free from hindrances to meditation; 'eat but little' means eating neither too much nor too little; 'restraining speech, body and mind' means directing the operations of body, speech and mind to meditation; 'ever engaged in the Yoga of meditation' means being like this, i.e., constantly engaged in the Yoga of meditation day after day until death; 'taking refuge in dispassion' means developing aversion to all objects except the one entity to be meditated upon, by considering the imperfections of all objects and thus cultivating detachment to everything.

Forsaking 'egoism' means abandoning the tendency to consider what is other than the self, as well as neutralising the power of forcible Vasnas (tendencies) which nourish (egoism), and the resulting pride, desire, wrath and possessiveness. 'With no feeling of mine' means free from the notion that what does not belong to oneself belongs to oneself; 'Who is tranil' means, who finds sole happiness in experiencing the self. One who has become like this and performs the Yoga of meditation becomes worthy for the state of Brahman. The meaning is that, freed from all bonds, he experiences the self as It really is.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yuktah, being endowed; buddhya, with an intellect-which is identical with the faculty of determination; visuddhaya, pure, free from maya (delusion); and niyamya, controlling, subduing; atmanam, oneself, the aggregate of body and organs; dhrtya, with fortitude, with steadlines; tyaktva, rejecting; visayan, the objects; sabdadin, beginning from sound -from the context it follows that 'rejecting the objects' means rejecting all things which are meant for pleasure and are in excess of those meant only for the mere maintenance of the body; and vyudasya, eliminating; raga-dvesau, attachment and hatred with regard to things which come to hand for the maintenance of the body-.
Therefore,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Endowed with a pure intellect, subduing the self with firmness, renouncing sense-objects like sound etc., and casting aside attraction and hatred...

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Endowed with a pure intellect free from doubt and delusion, subduing the body and senses with fortitude, and abandoning the sense-objects like sound etc., which are not necessary for the maintenance of the body, as well as attraction and hatred...

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Endowed with a purified intellect, subduing the mind with fortitude, renouncing the sense-objects like sound etc., and casting aside attraction and hatred...

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Endowed with a pure intellect, subduing the body and senses with fortitude, renouncing sense-objects like sound etc., and casting aside attraction and hatred...

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Endowed with a pure intellect free from doubt and delusion, subduing the mind by turning away from objects, keeping objects like sound far away, and eliminating attraction and hatred caused by them...

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Endowed with a pure intellect, subduing the self with firmness, renouncing sense-objects like sound etc., and casting aside attraction and hatred...

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Endowed with a pure intellect, subduing the body and senses with firmness, renouncing sense-objects like sound etc., and casting aside attraction and hatred...

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Endowed with pure understanding, restraining the mind with resolve, relinquishing sound and other objects of the senses, and renouncing attraction and aversion.

 When one is purified by intelligence, he keeps himself in the mode of goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in trance. He is not attached to the objects of sense gratification, and he is free from attachment and hatred in his activities. Such a detached person naturally prefers to live in a secluded place, he does not eat more than what he requires, and he controls the activities of his body and mind. He has no false ego because he does not accept the body as himself. Nor has he a desire to make the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things. Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. He is satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of the Lord, and he is never angry in the absence of sense gratification. Nor does he endeavor to acquire sense objects. Thus when he is completely free from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all material things, and that is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage is called the brahma-bhūta stage. When one is free from the material conception of life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated. This is described in Bhagavad-gītā (2.70) : āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī “A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires – that enter like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but is always still – can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.”