Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
dambho darpo.abhimānaśca krodhaḥ pāruṣyameva ca .
ajñānaṃ cābhijātasya pārtha sampadamāsurīm

Word Meanings:
दम्भः - hypocrisy
दर्पः - arrogance
अभिमानः - selfconceit
च - and
क्रोधः - wrath
पारुष्यम् - harshness
एव - even
च - and
अज्ञानम् - ignorance
च - and
अभिजातस्य - to the one born
पार्थ - O Partha
सम्पदम् - state
आसुरीम् - demoniac

Life Application:
Beware of ostentation, arrogance, self-conceit, anger, harshness, and ignorance, which mark demonic nature.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Hypocrisy, arrogance, pride, anger, harshness, and ignorance—these belong to the one born for a demoniac state, O Partha.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Hypocrisy, arrogance and self-conceit, anger and also harshness and ignorance, belong to one who is born for a demoniacal state, O Partha (Arjuna).

दम्भः hypocrisy? दर्पः arrogance? अभिमानः selfconceit? च and? क्रोधः wrath? पारुष्यम् harshness? एव even? च and? अज्ञानम् ignorance? च and? अभिजातस्य to the one born for? पार्थ O Partha? सम्पदम् state?,आसुरीम् demoniacal.Commentary Dambha Hypocrisy. To pretend to be what one is not? to pretend to be religious and pious. It consists of bragging of ones own greatness. Religious hypocrisy is the worst form of hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is a mixture of deceit and falsehood. Those who boast about their own merits will get demerit only.Darpa Arrogance. Pride of learning? wealth? high connection? etc. An arrogant man cannot endure to see his fellowmen happy. He is more and more enraged at the fortune of his fellowmen in the matter of learning? happiness and prosperity.Parushyam (in speech) To speak of the blind as having lotuslike eyes? of the ugly as beautiful? of a man of low birth as one of high birth and so on? usually with an ulterior? selfish or evil motive.Ajnanam Ignorance? misconception of ones duties. An ignorant man is blind as to what should be done and what should not be done. There is absence of discrimination. Just as a child will put anything it gets in its hands into its mouth? whether it is clean or dirty? so also is the condition of the ignorant man who is not able to discriminate between the Real and the unreal? the good and the evil? virtue and vice. He is on the path of destruction. He does not know the road that leads to Moskha or liberation. He is drowned in the ocean of this worldly existence.These are the six demonical alities. These evil alities constitute the satanic or demonical wealth. They are obstacles on the path of liberation.By addressing Arjuna as Partha? Lord Krishna implies that Arjuna has no demonical alities in him as he is born in a noble family and is the son of Pritha.People of Asuric nature have no faith. They dispute every doctrine. They deny the existence of God. They deny the cycle of the worldprocess? the Vedas and the laws of ethics. Sensual indulgence is their goal. They rob people and take away their neighbours wives. They kill people ruthlessly. They do not believe in reincarnation and in the other world. They have no idea of right conduct? purity and selfrestraint.Asuras are those persons who have waged war and who still wage war with the gods in heaven. Those who are endowed with Asuric tendencies or evil alities are Asuras or demons. They exist in abundance in this iron age. Kamsa was an Asura. Hiranyakasipu was an Asura.Even a man of university alitifactions and titles is a veritable Asura if he is endowed with evil tendencies or Asubha Vasanas.Esoterically? the war between the Asuras and the gods is the internal fight that is ever going on between the pure and the impure tendencies in man? between Sattva and RajasTamas.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Hypocrisy, pride, insolence, cruelty, ignorance belong to him who is born of the godless qualities.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Hypocrisy, arrogance and self-conceit, anger and also harshness and ignorance, belong to one who is born for a demoniacal state, O Partha.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that this single verse provides a vivid description of a deformed personality. 'Dambha' is pretending to be what one is not, particularly showing off fake religiousness to hide evil intent. 'Darpa' is arrogance born of wealth, status, or education, which isolates the person. 'Krodha' (anger) is the natural reaction when their self-imagined greatness is not accepted by others, manifesting as 'parushyam' (harshness) in thoughts and speech. All these qualities stem from 'ajnanam' (ignorance of the Self and the true nature of the universe), which makes the person completely ego-centric and rebellious against society.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Ostentation, arrogance, pride, anger, and also harshness, and ignorance, are in the person born for the demoniac wealth,  O son of  Prtha !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Pomposity, arrogance, self-conceit, wrath, rudeness and ignorance - these, O Arjuna, belong to him who is born to a demoniac destiny.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O son of Prtha, (the attributes) of one destined to have the demoniacal nature are religious ostentation, pride and haughtiness, [Another reading is abhimanah, self-conceit.-Tr.], anger as also rudeness and ignorance.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the Lord now describes the demoniac qualities (asuri sampat) which are to be abandoned. Arrogance (darpa) is the elation that leads to transgression of duties. Harshness (parushyam) is rude speech, and ignorance (ajnanam) is false conception of duties.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Hypocrisy, pride, vanity, anger, harshness, and ignorance—all these are the marks of a person born with a demoniac state, O Partha.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that hypocrisy (dambha) is pretending to possess virtues like righteousness or knowledge which one doesn't have. Pride (darpa) is arrogance based on external belongings like wealth, family, or status. Vanity (abhiman) is self-conceit based on identification with the physical body, believing one is superior in birth or lineage. Anger (krodha) arises when there is any obstacle to one's desires or pride. Harshness (parushyam) is rudeness in body language, sight, and words. Ignorance (ajnanam) is the complete lack of discrimination regarding duty and non-duty.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Dambha or pomposity' is the practice of Dharma for earning a reputation for righteousness. 'Arrogance' is the elation caused by the pleasures of sense-objects and the conseent inability to discriminate between what ought to be done and what ought not to be done. 'Self-conceit' is the estimation of oneself in a measure not warranted by one's education and birth. 'Wrath' is the sense of antagonism causing injury to others. 'Rudeness' is the nature of causing grief to Sadhus. 'Ignorance' is incapacity to discriminate between hight and low forms of conduct and principles, and also between what ought to be done and what ought not to be. These are the alities that are found in one born for a demoniac destiny. Asuras are those who rel against the ?ndments of the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.1–16.5 jointly): It has been stated  [at the end of the last chapter] that  'by understanding this' etc.  The thing called  'understanding' comes to be  [in  the following] manner :  After the knowledge, born from hearing  [the scriptures etc.],  there arises a thought-process consisting of the logical analysis,  deliberation and  deep meditation that take the form 'This (what is taught in the scriptures etc.)  is like this'.  The above thought-process is of the nature  of investigation, critical examination and judgement.  From this thought-process one gains a good knowledge of a well practised from i.e., a contemplation of that object, free from the humiliation (influence) of different category.  When this is gained, understanding is achieved  Hence, it will be declared :
 'By critically examining in this way fully, act as you please'.  (Ch. XVIII, 63).
 
Here, only the preceptor and the scripture are mainly capable of creating the scriptural knowledge.  But in producing reasoning, deliberation and meditation the main cause is the capacity to examine critically a thing and  it is a special attribute of the pupil and it is an important one.  Therefore, with an idea that this is in Arjuna and with an intention to add a preparatory note to the purposeful statement  'By critically examining this, [act as you please]'; the Bhagavat, the preceptor, says  'Fearlessness etc.'
 
The Ignorance, born of the Tamas (Stand) occupies the devilish side.  This is repelled  (or removed) by the well augmented wisdom that takes hold of the divine part.  This is the nature of things [under estion]  'You  (Arjuna) have taken refuge in the divine part viz., wisdom, born of the Sattva (Strand).  Therefore shirking off the internal Ignorance in the nature of delusion, you should undertake the action, that has the sanction of the scriptures and that is of the nature of eradicating the external foe having the form of ignorance.'  Thus commences the [present] chapter.  Hence -
 Abhayam etc., upto pandava.  These are the identification marks of a person of divine parts.  [Hence] they are clearly identified.  Self-restraint :  subduing the sense organs.  Thought-lessness :  the perfarmance of action without examining the antecedent and the seel; its absence is the absence of thought-lessness.  Vital power :  the act of casting away [all] limitations by taking hold energy in the Self.  [All] this is the divine wealth and this is for your total emancipation, as it destroys craving.  Therefore, don't get sorrow like 'Having killed brothers etc., how can I (Arjuna) enjoy pleasure ?'  [The idea of] the rest  [of passage] is clear.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O son of Prtha, dambhah, religious ostentation; darpah, pride arising from wealth, relatives, etc.; atimanah, haughtiness, as explained earlier; and krodhah, anger; eva ca, as also; parusyam, redeness, using unkind words, e.g. to speak of a blind person as having eyes, an ugly person as handsome, a lowly born man as born of aristocracy, and so on; and ajnanam, ignorance, non-discriminating knowledge, false conception regarding what ought to be and ought not to be done; are (the attributes) abhijatasya, of one destined to have;-destined for what? in answer the Lord says-asurim, demoniacal; sampadam, nature.
The conseences of these natures are being stated:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that this single verse summarizes the entire range of demoniac qualities (asuri sampat) which are to be abandoned by a seeker because they lead to binding and down-fall.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the six attributes starting with hypocrisy represent the demoniac state. Addressing Arjuna as Partha implies he is free from these qualities due to his noble birth.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that 'ajnanam' (ignorance) is the root cause of all other demoniac qualities. Without knowledge of the Self, a person remains trapped in hypocrisy and pride.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that Asuras are those who disobey the commandments of the Lord. Their qualities lead them away from righteousness.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that pride and vanity are the foremost obstacles in the path of devotion because they prevent a person from surrendering to the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'parushyam' refers to harshness in speech and behavior, which damages social harmony and reflects an impure mind.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Pride, arrogance, conceit, anger, harshness and ignorance – these qualities belong to those of demoniac nature, O son of Pṛthā.

 In this verse, the royal road to hell is described. The demoniac want to make a show of religion and advancement in spiritual science, although they do not follow the principles. They are always arrogant or proud in possessing some type of education or so much wealth. They desire to be worshiped by others, and demand respectability, although they do not command respect. Over trifles they become very angry and speak harshly, not gently. They do not know what should be done and what should not be done. They do everything whimsically, according to their own desire, and they do not recognize any authority. These demoniac qualities are taken on by them from the beginning of their bodies in the wombs of their mothers, and as they grow they manifest all these inauspicious qualities.