Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
etānna hantumicchāmi ghnato.api madhusūdana .
api trailokyarājyasya hetoḥ kiṃ nu mahīkṛte

Word Meanings:
एतान् - these
न - not
हन्तुम् - to kill
इच्छामि - I wish
घ्नतः - killing
अपि - even though
मधुसूदन - O Madhusudana
अपि - even
त्रैलोक्यराज्यस्य - for three worlds kingdom
हेतोः - sake
किम् - what
नु - then
महीकृते - for sake of earth

Life Application:
Refuse to compromise your ethical principles for material gain, no matter how great the reward seems.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Madhusudana! Even if they kill me, or even for the sovereignty of the three worlds, I do not wish to kill them -- then what to speak of killing them for the sake of the earth.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
These I do not wish to kill, though they kill me, O Krishna,
even for the sake of dominion over the three worlds; leave alone killing
them for the sake of the earth.

एतान् these? न not? हन्तुम् to kill? इच्छामि (I) wish? घ्नतःअपि even if they kill me? मधुसूदन O Madhusudana (the slayer of Madhu? a demon)? अपि even? त्रैलोक्यराज्यस्य dominion over the three worlds? हेतोः for the sake of? किम् how? नु then? महीकृते for the sake of the earth.No Commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
I would not kill them, even for three worlds; why then for this poor earth? It matters not if I myself am killed.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Thinking, perhaps, that he has not presented his case forcefully enough before Krishna to win the Lord's endorsement of his view, Arjuna goes on to speak in vain of renunciation. He wants to show how large-hearted he is: even should his cousins slay him, he would still not be prepared to kill them. He reaches the height of exaggeration when he declares that he would not fight even for sovereignty over the three worlds -- let alone for the mere kingdom of Hastinapura.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
By slaying Dhrtarastra's sons what joy would be to go us, O Janardana?

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
These I would not slay, though they might slay me, even for the sovereignty of the three worlds - how much less for this earth O Krsna?

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Madhusudana, even if I am killed, I do not want to kill these even for the sake of a kingdom extending over the three worlds; what to speak of doing so for the earth!

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Killing these is desired only for the sake of attaining the earth, and even that attainment is not truly wished for -- he shows this by an a-fortiori argument, in 'Api...': my mind does not even wish for the great sovereignty of the three worlds through slaying my own kinsmen; so how much less would I countenance killing my kinsmen for the mere attainment of the earth -- what need even to say it, is the sense. Anticipating the objection that battle should still be undertaken since satisfaction may be gained from subduing enemies like Duryodhana, he says, in 'Nihatya...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
(Note: covers both verses) Teachers, fathers, sons, and likewise grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and whatever other relatives there are -- even if they strike at me, I do not wish to kill them; and O Madhusudana, even if I were to gain the kingdom of the three worlds, I do not wish to kill them, then what of merely the earth?

Explanation: Even if these kinsmen of ours, driven by anger, wish to remove what displeases them by striking and even killing me, I still do not wish, driven by anger, to kill them in order to remove what displeases me. Even if, driven by greed for kingdom in pursuit of what pleases them, they wish to kill me, I still do not wish, driven by greed in pursuit of what pleases me, to kill them. The point is: I am not willing to purchase the gates of hell by falling prey to anger and greed.

The repeated use of the word 'api' (even) twice here conveys Arjuna's intent: since I create no obstacle at all to their self-interest, why indeed would they kill me? But suppose, thinking 'this one has obstructed our self-interest before,' they were to set about destroying my body -- even then (ghnato'pi) I do not wish to kill them. Further: my killing them gaining me the kingdom of the three worlds is not even a real possibility, but suppose it were -- even then (api trailokya-rajyasya hetoh) I do not wish to kill them.

The address 'Madhusudana' (slayer of the demon Madhu) conveys: You are indeed the slayer of demons, but these teachers like Drona and grandfathers like Bhishma are hardly demons, that I should wish to kill them. They are our very closest and dearest relations.

'Acharyah' (teachers) -- among these kinsmen, to those revered teachers like Dronacharya through whom we have our bond of learning and welfare, ought I render service, or wage war against them? At a teacher's feet one ought to surrender even one's own self, one's own life. That alone is fitting for us.

'Pitarah' (fathers) -- our own body is itself but the form of those who are our fathers by bodily bond. Being their very embodiment, how could we, driven by anger or greed, kill our own fathers?

'Putrah' (sons) -- the sons of ourselves and of our brothers are, in every way, to be nurtured and protected. Even if they were to act against us, protecting them remains our duty.

'Pitamahah' (grandfathers) -- such grandfathers, being venerable even to our own fathers, are supremely venerable to us. They may chastise us, even strike us. But our conduct toward them should be such that they suffer no distress whatsoever, but rather find happiness, comfort, and service.

'Matulah' (maternal uncles) -- our maternal uncles are the brothers of the mothers who nurtured us. Hence they ought to be as venerable to us as our mothers themselves.

'Shvashurah' (fathers-in-law) -- these fathers-in-law of ours are the revered fathers of my wife and my brothers' wives. Hence they are, for us too, equal to our own fathers. How could I wish to kill them?

'Pautrah' (grandsons) -- the sons of our sons are even more deserving of nurture and protection than our sons themselves.

'Shyalah' (brothers-in-law) -- our brothers-in-law are also the beloved brothers of our own wives. How could they too be killed!

'Sambandhinah' (relatives) -- as many relatives as are visible here, and as many besides, ought to be nurtured, protected, and served -- or should they be killed? Even if killing them would gain us the kingdom of the three worlds, would killing them even then be proper? Killing them is wholly improper.

Transition: in the previous verse Arjuna gave two reasons for not killing his kinsmen. Now he establishes, from the standpoint of consequences too, that his kinsmen should not be killed.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Arjuna said -- Sanjaya said: The high-souled Partha, supremely compassionate, seeing there, stationed in both armies, his fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, and friends -- his own kinsmen arrayed for battle -- was overcome, and spoke thus to Krishna.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Nihatya etc. upto anususruma. Sin alone is the agent in the act of slaying these desperadoes. Therefore here the idea is this : These ememies of ours have been slain, i.e., have been take possession of, by sin. Sin would come to us also after slaying them. Sin in this context is the disregard, on account of greed etc., to the injurious conseences like the ruination of the family and the like. That is why Arjuna makes a specific mention of the [ruin of the] family etc., and of its duties in the passage 'How by slaying my own kinsmen etc'.

The act of slaying, undertaken with an individualizing idea about its result, and with a particularizing idea about the person to be slain, is a great sin. To say this very thing precisely and to indicate the intensity of his own agony, Arjuna says only to himself [see next sloka]:

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
One might object: leaving others aside, the sons of Dhritarashtra alone ought to be killed, since satisfaction could arise from slaying these especially cruel inflictors of such suffering -- to this he answers: what satisfaction could there be for us in killing our brothers, the sons of Dhritarashtra like Duryodhana, and then continuing to live? None whatsoever, is the sense. Killing one's kinsmen for the sake of a mere fleeting semblance of happiness -- the kind coveted by the deluded -- which becomes the cause of prolonged suffering in hell, is simply not fitting for us, is the sense. By the address 'Janardana,' Arjuna hints: if these deserve killing, then You Yourself should slay them -- for even in destroying all beings at the time of dissolution, You remain untouched by any sin. One might object further: by the teaching of the smritis that 'the incendiary, the poisoner, the one who attacks with weapons, the plunderer of wealth, the seizer of land, and the abductor of another's wife -- these six are aggressors,' and by the further teaching that 'one may slay an approaching aggressor without hesitation; no fault attaches to the slayer of an aggressor' -- since Duryodhana and the rest are aggressors in every sense, they surely deserve to be killed. To this he answers, in 'Papam eva...': having killed these aggressors, sin alone would attach to us who remain, is the connection. Or: only sin would attach, and no benefit whatsoever, seen or unseen, is the sense. For the injunction 'one should not injure' belongs to sacred law (dharma-shastra), while 'one may slay an aggressor' belongs to the weaker authority of political science (artha-shastra); as Yajnavalkya states: 'when the smritis conflict, reasoning grounded in worldly practice prevails; and dharma-shastra prevails over artha-shastra.' An alternative explanation: one might object -- even if you feel no satisfaction in killing the sons of Dhritarashtra, they will surely feel satisfaction in killing you, and so they will kill you -- to this he answers, in 'Papam eva...': these aggressors, having killed us and remaining alive, being sinners already, will only accrue further sin thereby, no happiness whatsoever; thus, even should they kill us without our fighting back, they alone become the sinners, and no loss whatsoever accrues to us through any contact with sin, is the intent.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
One might object: if out of compassion you do not kill these, they will surely kill you out of greed for the kingdom -- so you yourself should kill them and enjoy the kingdom. To this he answers, in 'Etan na...', across a verse and a half: even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds -- even to attain it -- even should they be the ones killing us, I do not wish to kill them. Much less, then, for the mere attainment of the earth, is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
One might object: killing these aggressors, who obstruct one's own rightful kingdom, is itself proper -- by the maxim 'one may slay one who seeks to slay,' no fault attaches to killing them. To this he answers, in 'Etan...': the construction runs 'ghnato'pi etan... api trailokya-rajyasya hetoh' (even should they kill me, even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds). Killing these is desired only for the sake of attaining the earth, and even that attainment is not truly wished for -- he shows this, by an a-fortiori argument, in 'Api...': my mind does not even desire the great sovereignty of the three worlds through slaying my own kinsmen; so how much less would I countenance killing my kinsmen for the mere attainment of the earth -- what need even to say it, say the earlier commentators. By addressing Him as 'Madhusudana' (slayer of the demon Madhu), Arjuna hints: since You too once protected Your own son (i.e., devotee), how then should I bring about the destruction of my own kinsmen? Or, taking 'Madhu' to also denote the demon Kaitabha: since You are the destroyer of Madhu and Kaitabha -- the embodiments of rajas and tamas -- You should not engage me, Your own devotee, in this terrible act which partakes of both those qualities, Arjuna hints, in addressing Him as 'Madhusudana.' Some say the address 'Madhusudana' indicates the Lord's role as establisher of the Vedic path.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Sri Venkatanatha did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
One might object: even your own kinsmen, who stand here ready for battle -- if you do not kill them, they themselves will kill you. To this he answers, in 'Etan...': O Madhusudana, even though they kill me, I do not wish to kill these. By the address 'Madhusudana,' Arjuna hints: with You as my ally, they are not even capable of killing me. Even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds I do not wish to act thus -- how much less would I do so for the mere earth.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Even the wish to kill does not arise in me, let alone the actual act of killing, is the sense. 'Mahikrite' means 'for the sake of the earth.'

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
why should I wish to kill them, even though they might otherwise kill me? O maintainer of all living entities, I am not prepared to fight with them even in exchange for the three worlds, let alone this earth. What pleasure will we derive from killing the sons of Dhritarashtra?

 Arjuna has addressed Lord Kṛṣṇa as Govinda because Kṛṣṇa is the object of all pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significant word, Arjuna indicates that Kṛṣṇa should understand what will satisfy Arjuna's senses. But Govinda is not meant for satisfying our senses. If we try to satisfy the senses of Govinda, however, then automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially, everyone wants to satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the order supplier for such satisfaction. The Lord will satisfy the senses of the living entities as much as they deserve, but not to the extent that they may covet. But when one takes the opposite way -- namely, when one tries to satisfy the senses of Govinda without desiring to satisfy one's own senses -- then by the grace of Govinda all desires of the living entity are satisfied. Arjuna's deep affection for community and family members is exhibited here partly due to his natural compassion for them. He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to show his opulence to friends and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all his relatives and friends will be killed on the battlefield and he will be unable to share his opulence after victory. This is a typical calculation of material life. The transcendental life, however, is different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy the desires of the Lord, he can, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for the service of the Lord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a farthing. Arjuna did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any need to kill them, he desired that Kṛṣṇa kill them personally. At this point he did not know that Kṛṣṇa had already killed them before their coming into the battlefield and that he was only to become an instrument for Kṛṣṇa. This fact is disclosed in following chapters. As a natural devotee of the Lord, Arjuna did not like to retaliate against his miscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the Lord's plan that they should all be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not retaliate against the wrongdoer, but the Lord does not tolerate any mischief done to the devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on His own account, but He excuses no one who has done harm to His devotees. Therefore the Lord was determined to kill the miscreants, although Arjuna wanted to excuse them.