Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yajñe tapasi dāne ca sthitiḥ saditi cocyate .
karma caiva tadarthīyaṃ sadityevābhidhīyate

Word Meanings:
यज्ञे - in sacrifice
तपसि - in austerity
दाने - in gift
च - and
स्थितिः - steadiness
सत् - eternal reality
इति - thus
च - and
उच्यते - is called
कर्म - action
च - and
एव - also
तदर्थीयम् - in connection with these
सत् - eternal reality
इति - thus
एव - even
अभिधीयते - is called.

Life Application:
Steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity, gift is called 'Sat'; action for sake of That is also called 'Sat'.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity, and charity is also called 'SAT'; and also action for the sake of the Supreme is verily named as 'SAT'.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity and gift, is also called 'Sat' and also action in connection with these (or for the sake of the Supreme) is called 'Sat'.

यज्ञे in sacrifice? तपसि in austerity? दाने in gift? च and? स्थितिः steadiness? सत् Sat? इति thus? च and? उच्यते is called? कर्म action? च and? एव also? तदर्थीयम् in connection with these or for the sake of the Supreme? सत् Sat? इति thus? एव even? अभिधीयते is called.Commentary If you perform sacrifice? austerity? gift and all actions in a spirit of total surrender to the Lord or the Eternal Being with purity and sincerity of heart? you will attain the highest goal of life or immortality? freedom and eternal bliss. If you do them in the name and for the sake of Brahman you will attain perfection and supreme peace of the Absolute.If you pin your faith on the glory and power of this name Om or Om Tat Sat? you will be freed from the bondage of birth and death. If you perform any sacrifice? austerity or charity or any action in a selfless and motiveless spirit? surrendering all the actions and their rewards to the Lord and if you utter the word Sat with faith? feeling and devotion? you will attain perfection and success in the action.Even the imperfect and nonSattvic acts of sacrifice? austerity and gift will be turned into perfect and Sattvic ones.These Sacrifice? austerity and gift.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Conviction in sacrifice, in austerity and in giving is also called Sat.' So too an action done only for the Lord's sake.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity, and charity is called 'SAT'. Similarly, any action performed for the sake of the Lord (tadarthiyam karma) is also called 'SAT' because it becomes the means for liberation. By surrendering ego and remembering the Lord, all actions are purified.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The steadfastness is performing sacrifice, in austerity and in giving gift is also called SAT; and also the act for such purpose is [hence] just called SAT.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Devotion to sacrifice, austerities and gifts is also called Sat; and so any act for such purposes is named Sat.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And the steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity and charity is spoken of as sat. And even the action meant for these is, verily, called as sat (good).

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the Lord describes another application of the word 'SAT', which is steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity, and charity. Chanting these names makes the ritual perfect.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity and gift, is also called 'Sat' and also action for the sake of the Supreme is called 'Sat'.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'sthiti' (steadfastness) refers to one's devotion and faith in performing sattvic sacrifice, austerity, and charity, as well as Veda-enjoined duties, pilgrimages, and services. Any action, whether worldly (occupations, daily routines) or spiritual (chanting, worship, meditation), when performed without seeking personal comfort and solely for the pleasure of the Lord, becomes 'tadarthiyam karma' (action for His sake). Since these actions are linked with the eternal Lord, they become 'Sat', and their result is also eternal liberation.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Therefore, devotion of persons of the first three stations who follow the Vedas in respect of sacrifices, austerities and gifts is called Sat, since it is auspicious. So the Vedas, Vedic acts and the three stations, expressed by the term 'brahmana,' since they are characterised by their connection with the words 'Om Tat Sat,' are to be distinguished from what are not the Vedas and Vedic.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Om etc. upto abhidhiyate.  An indication of the Brahman i.e., an act of facing (or aiming at)  the Brahman is made by these  three words viz.,  OM, TAT and SAT.  Of  them, Om indicates that 'This purport of the scriptures is [to be]  accepted as long as one has bodily connection'.

The pronoun TAT, which denotes generality and which is incapable of denoting exclusively a particular, mentions, as far as the Brahman is concerned, the absence of intention for fruit.  An intention is not possible without reference to something particular. No doubt  [TAT] may denote all particulars  [in general]. But it would lead to intending the fruits and the doer-ship with regard to all [in general].  Even then [the Brahman] cannot have connection with any particular fruit.

The Vedic word SAT denotes 'praise'.  The act, like this sacrifice etc., though performed, turns out to be an act of the Tamas (evil act) if it is performed with the idea, 'It is an evil act'.  Further, what is performed  with an intention for a particular fruit is not praiseworthy, and it causes nothing but bondage. Therefore, those, who bear in mind, 'This is a thing to be performed' - they are not fettered, even though they perform acts like sacrifice etc.  With this idea only, it has been said in the Adiparvan as -

'The austerity is not dirt, nor the [Vedic] study, nor the natural ritual enjoined by the Vedas, and nor the act of earning wealth by all efforts.  But, if they are struck by mind, they themselves become dirt.' (MB, Adi. i, 210).

[Here in this passage]  dirt that which fetters.  Natural :  [That is, ordained ], such as - 'Without expecting anything, a Brahman should learn the Vedas etc., together with their six subsidiaries' etc.

By all effort :  by the act that is suitable and is well known in the scriptures and in the worldly practice.  By mind :  by the mind that is yoked to the triad of the Strands, Sattva etc.  [Those actions that]  have been simply ruined  [by that mind], are binding and not otherwise.  This is the idea here.

Therefore, the acts like sacrifice etc., and the acts, like acquiring  [Wealth] etc., for that purpose, have to be performed as being inevitable as long as the body exists.

Or, perhaps, the word  OM  conveys  [with regard to the Brahman]  the idea of That in Which the entire universe has been totally calmed down.  TAT conveys the idea of That of the nature of Sovereign  Independence of Will, which is nothing but comprehending the rising waves in the form of the universe.  And the word SAT denotes the act of manifestation by the Brahman - even though It is complete in Itself - as [the universe]  having  varied nature, a manifestation that  causes differences  (or duality) expanding under the weight of its Sovereign  Independence of Will.  Hence it has been said  'In the sense of manifesting as beings and in the sense of manifesting  perfectly  [SAT is employed].'  Thus, having in front  [as a cause]  that aspect  (the Soul) of  highly tranquil nature; and having in the  centre that aspect which is well connected with desire-waves viz., the desire to make gift, the desire to perform sacrifice and the desire to observe penance; this final body radiates  (or dances)  filled with a group of activities, such as  offering gift, performing sacrifice and observing austerity, and of what are conducive to them.  This triad is indeed simultaneously the inherent nature of the Unhindered One (the Soul).  So, what fruit could be there ?  And to whom ?  How ?  Whence ?  Where ?  And by what means ?

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And sthitih, steadfastness; that is yajne, in sacrifice, in the act of sacrifice; the steadfastness that is tapasi, in austerity; and the steadfastness that is dane, in charity; that ucyate, is spoken of; sat iti, as sat, by learned persons. And eva, even; the karma, action; tad-arthiyam, meant for these-for sacrifice, charity and austerity, or for Him whose names are under discussion, i.e. for God; is eva, verily; abhidhiyate, called; sat iti, as sat (good).
Thus, in this way, the acts of sacrifice, austerity, etc., even when they are devoid of sattva and goodness, become good and endued with sattva by he use of the three names of Brahman with faith.
And as regards those (sacrifice etc.), since in all cases everything is performed with a predominance of faith, therefore-

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that steadfastness (sthiti) in sacrifice, austerity, and charity is called 'SAT'. The word 'SAT' expresses firm devotion. Furthermore, any action performed for the sake of the Lord (tadarthiyam karma) is also declared as 'SAT'.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that steadfastness (nistha) in performing sacrifice, austerity, and charity is also called 'SAT' by the wise. Actions performed for the sake of the Lord (offered to Brahman) or which lead to the knowledge of Brahman are called 'SAT'. Chanting this name purifies all actions and makes them complete, showcasing the greatness of the entire designation 'OM TAT SAT'.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that steadfastness (nistha) in sacrifice, etc., is called 'SAT'. Any auxiliary actions performed to accomplish these (like gardening for temple flowers, farming for grains, earning wealth for charity) are also called 'SAT' because their ultimate object is the Lord. Since this triple name has such glory, it should be chanted to make all actions perfect.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity, and charity is called 'SAT' by the wise. Any action performed for the sake of the Lord is called 'SAT'. Chanting 'OM TAT SAT' makes even imperfect and non-sattvic actions complete, sattvic, and filled with devotion.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that devotion of the three stations of life (Brahmanas) in performing sacrifices, austerities, and gifts is called 'SAT' because it is auspicious. Actions done for their sake are also called 'SAT'. Thus, 'OM TAT SAT' distinguishes Veda-enjoined actions from other actions.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that steadfastness in performing Agnihotra (sacrifice), austerities, and great charity with exclusive devotion to the Lord is called 'SAT'. Any preparatory actions like gathering materials for worship are also called 'SAT' because they are for His sake.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that steadfastness (nistha) in performing sacrifices, etc., is called 'SAT' (good). Any action done to attain the Supreme Lord is also called 'SAT'. Chanting this triple name makes even imperfect or non-sattvic sacrifices complete and auspicious.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The sacrifice that is performed with the aim of achieving its fruit, and which is prescribed in the scriptures, is called rajasic, and it is unstable and temporary.

 The words praśaste karmaṇi, or “prescribed duties,” indicate that there are many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are purificatory processes, beginning from the time of conception up to the end of one’s life. Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the living entity. In all such activities it is recommended that one vibrate oṁ tat sat. The words sad-bhāve and sādhu-bhāve indicate the transcendental situation. Acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious of the activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called a sādhu. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matter becomes clear in the association of the devotees. The words used are satāṁ prasaṅgāt. Without good association, one cannot achieve transcendental knowledge. When initiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates the words oṁ tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of performance of yajña the object is the Supreme, oṁ tat sat. The word tad-arthīyam further means offering service to anything which represents the Supreme, including such service as cooking and helping in the Lord’s temple, or any other kind of work for broadcasting the glories of the Lord. These supreme words oṁ tat sat are thus used in many ways to perfect all activities and make everything complete.