Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
rudrādityā vasavo ye ca sādhyā viśve.aśvinau marutaścoṣmapāśca .
gandharvayakṣāsurasiddhasaṅghā vīkṣante tvāṃ vismitāścaiva sarve

Word Meanings:
रुद्रादित्याः - Rudras and Adityas
वसवः - Vasus
ये - these
च - and
साध्याः - Sadhyas
विश्वे - Visvedevas
अश्िवनौ - the two Asvins
मरुतः - Maruts
च - and
उष्मपाः - Pitris
च - and
गन्धर्वयक्षासुरसिद्धसङ्घाः - hosts of Gandharvas
वीक्षन्ते - are looking at
त्वाम् - Thee
विस्मिताः - astonished
च - and
एव - even
सर्वे - all.

Life Application:
See cosmic guardians, ancient ancestors, and perfected beings gazing upon the divine form in complete amazement.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The Rudras, Adityas, Vasus and Sadhyas, Visvedevas and the two Asvins, Maruts and Usmapas, and the hosts of Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras and Siddhas - all of these, indeed filled with wonder, are looking at You.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, Sadhyas, Visvedevas, the two Asvins, Maruts, the manes and the hosts of celestial singers, Yakshas, demons and the perfected ones, are all looking at Thee, in great amazement.

रुद्रादित्याः Rudras and Adityas? वसवः Vasus? ये these? च and? साध्याः Sadhyas? विश्वे Visvedevas? अश्िवनौ the two Asvins? मरुतः Maruts? च and? उष्मपाः Pitris? च and? गन्धर्वयक्षासुरसिद्धसङ्घाः hosts of Gandharvas? Yakshas? Asuras and Siddhas? वीक्षन्ते are looking at? त्वाम् Thee? विस्मिताः astonished? च and? एव even? सर्वे all.Commentary Sadhyas are a class of gods of whom Brahma is the chief.Visvedevas are ten gods who in Vedic times were considered as protectors of human beings. They were called guardians of the world. They were givers of plenty to the human beings. Their names are Krata? Daksha? Vasu? Satya? Kama? Kala? Dhvani? Rochaka? Adrava and Pururava.The two Asvins? born of Prabha (light)? daughter of Tushta and the Sun? are the physicians of the gods.Rudras? Adityas? Vasus and Maruts -- see tenth chapter? verses 21 and 23.Ushmapa A class of manes. They accept the food offered in the Sraaddha (anniversary) ceremony or the obseies? while it is hot. Hence they are called Ushmapas. There are seven groups of manes.Gandharvas are celestial singers such as Haha and Huhu.Yakshas such as Kubera (the god of wealth) Asuras such as Virochana perfected ones such as Kapila.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The Vital Forces, the Major stars, Fire, Earth, Air, Sky, Sun, Heaven, Moon and Planets; the Angels, the Guardians of the Universe, the divine Healers, the Winds, the Fathers, the Heavenly Singers; and hosts of Mammon-worshippers, demons as well as saints, are amazed.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Arjuna further describes that those who are beholding this divine form also include all those presiding deities of natural laws or forces, who were worshipped and adored in the Vedic times. They are all looking at this form in amazement.
We have already described almost all the deities mentioned in this verse in the previous chapter. The new names mentioned here are - Sadhyas, Visvedevas, and Usmapas.
Due to our ignorance of the meanings of these words today, this verse may probably not seem meaningful to us. But Arjuna, being a man of the Vedic age and a student of the Vedas, was well acquainted with all of them, so his language could only be this. We only have to see what effect the vision of this Cosmic Form had on Arjuna and what the reaction of the various types of gods, sages, etc., was. Everyone saw and understood this vast Cosmic Form of formless shape according to their own minds.
By giving more and more details, Arjuna tries to clarify the picture of the Cosmic Form on the minds of the listeners.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Visvas (Visvadevas), the twin Asvins and the Maruts, and the Steam-drinkers (Manes) and the hosts of the Gandharvas, the Yoksas, the demons and the perfected ones - all gaze on You and are ite amazed.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Visvas, the Asvins, the Maruts and the manes, and the hosts of Gandharvas, Yaksas, Asuras, and Siddhas - all gaze upon You in amazement.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Those who are the Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus and the Sadhyas [sadhyas: A particular class of celestial beings.-V.S.A.], the Visve (-devas), the two Asvins, the Maruts and the Usmapas, and hosts of Gandharvas, Yaksas, demons and Siddhas-all of those very ones gaze at You, being indeed struck with wonder.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He (Arjuna) states another reason for the astonishing nature of the Lord's form being seen — 'Moreover...'. The connection is that all those Rudras and others mentioned before, having been filled with wonder, are looking at You.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Those who are the communities of the eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, eight Vasus, twelve Sadhyas, ten Visvedevas, and two Asvins, forty-nine Maruts, seven Pitris (manes), and Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras, and Siddhas, all of them are looking at You in amazement.

Exposition—'rudrādityā vasavo ye ca sādhyā viśve'śvinau marutaścoṣmapāśca'—The names of the eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, eight Vasus, two Asvins, and forty-nine Maruts have been given in the commentary on the sixth verse of this chapter, so they should be referred to there.
Mana, Anumanta, Prana, Nara, Yana, Citti, Haya, Naya, Hamsa, Narayana, Prabhava, and Vibhu — these twelve are the 'Sadhyas' (Vayu Purana 66.15-16).
Kratu, Daksha, Srava, Satya, Kala, Kama, Dhuni, Kuruvan, Prabhavan, and Rocamana — these ten are the 'Visvedevas' (Vayu Purana 66.31-32).
Kavyavaha, Anala, Soma, Yama, Aryama, Agnishvatta, and Barhishat — these seven are the 'Pitris' (manes) (Shiva Purana, Dharma 63.2). Due to eating warm food (ushma), the name of the manes is 'Ushmapa'. 'gandharvayakṣāsurasiddhasaṅghāḥ' — From Kashyapa's wives Muni, Pradha, and Arishta, the Gandharvas were born. The Gandharvas are very skilled in the science of ragas and raginis. They are the singers of heaven. From Kashyapa's wife Khasa, the Yakshas were born.
The opponents of the demigods (footnote p. 588), namely the Daityas, Danavas, and Rakshasas, are called Asuras. Sages like Kapila and others are called Siddhas. 'vīkṣante tvāṁ vismitāścaiva sarve'— All the aforementioned deities, manes, Gandharvas, Yakshas, etc., are looking at You in amazement. All these deities, etc., are limbs of the Cosmic Form itself.
Connection—Now, in the next three verses, Arjuna describes the great, terrible form of the Cosmic Form and states its result.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Usmapa means manes, because the Sruti declares:  'Verily the manes receive the hot portions of the offerings' (Tai. Br., 1.3.10). All these, struck with amazement, behold You.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Ye, those who are; the rudra-adityah, Rudras and Adityas; vasavah, the Vasus; and sadhyah, the Sadhyas-the groups of Rudras and other gods; the gods visve, Visve-devas; and asvinau, the two Asvins; marutah, the Maruts; and usmapah, the Usmapas, (a class of) manes; and gandharva-yaksa-asura-siddha-sanghah, hosts of Gandharvas-viz Haha, Huhu and others-, Yaksas-viz Kubera and others-, demons-Virocana and others-, and Siddhas-Kapila and others; sarve eva, all of those very ones; viksante, gaze; tva, (i.e.) tvam, at You; vismitah eva, being indeed struck with wonder.
For,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'rudrādityā...' Moreover, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, and those who are the groups of gods named Sadhyas; the groups of gods indicated by the words 'Visve-devah' where 'Visve' has the same case-ending as 'Visva'; the two Asvins, Nasatya and Dasra; the forty-nine groups of gods called Maruts; and the Ushmapas, who are the Pitris (manes); and the hosts or assemblies of different species of beings, namely Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras, and Siddhas — are gazing at (viksante, i.e. pasyanti) You (tva, i.e. tvam). And because of beholding such a wonderful sight, all of them indeed are struck with wonder (vismitah), that is, they experience a unique, extraordinary state of astonishment.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover — 'rudra...' The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, and those who are the gods named Sadhyas; the Visvedevas; the two Asvin gods; the Maruts (the groups of winds); the Pitris (manes) called Ushmapas because they drink steam (or eat warm food), since the Sruti declares: 'Indeed, the Pitris receive the hot portions of the offerings'; and the Smriti says: 'As long as the food remains hot, and as long as they eat keeping silent, the Pitris partake of it, until the virtues of the offering are spoken aloud'; and the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras (like Virocana and others), and the hosts of Siddhas — all of these, being filled with wonder, are gazing at You. This is the connection (anvaya).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Moreover, seeing this form, not only am I filled with wonder, but the Rudras and others are also filled with wonder. So he says — 'rudra...' Ushmapas are the manes (Pitris) because they drink steam (eat warm food). This is known from the Sruti and Smriti: 'Indeed, the Pitris receive the hot portions' (Sruti) and 'As long as the food is hot, and as long as they eat in silence, the Pitris eat of it, until the qualities of the offering are spoken of' (Smriti). The groups or assemblies of Gandharvas like Haha, Huhu, etc., Yakshas like Kubera, etc., Asuras like Virocana, etc., and Siddhas like Kapila, etc. are looking at You. All of them indeed are struck with wonder (vismitah), meaning they have attained amazement.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In accordance with the enumeration of the different classes of gods, he explains the meaning of the word 'Ushmapa' as the manes (Pitris).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
No commentary.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Moreover, he says that even those Rudras and others who are favored by You, all being struck with wonder, are looking at You — 'rudra...'. The Sadhyas and Visves are specific groups of deities, to be understood like the Rudras and Adityas. Ushmapas are the manes (Pitris). The hosts (sanghas) are the assemblies of different species of beings, namely Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras, and Siddhas. The rest is clear.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
All the various manifestations of Lord Śiva, the Ādityas, the Vasus, the Sādhyas, the Viśvedevas, the two Aśvīs, the Maruts, the forefathers, the Gandharvas, the Yakṣas, the Asuras and the perfected demigods are beholding You in wonder.

There is no purport for this verse