Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śrībhagavānuvāca .
trividhā bhavati śraddhā dehināṃ sā svabhāvajā .
sāttvikī rājasī caiva tāmasī ceti tāṃ śṛṇu

Word Meanings:
त्रिविधा - threefold
भवति - is
श्रद्धा - faith
देहिनाम् - of the embodied
सा - that
स्वभावजा - inherent in nature
सात्त्विकी - Sattvic
राजसी - Rajasic
च - and
एव - even
तामसी - Tamasic
च - and
इति - thus
ताम् - it
श्रृणु - hear .

Life Application:
Threefold is the faith of embodied beings, born of their nature: Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic; hear of it.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The Blessed Lord said: The faith of the embodied souls is of three kinds—Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic—born of their own nature. Hear about it from Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Blessed Lord said  Threefold is the faith of the embodied, which is inherent in their nature  the Sattvic (pure), the Rajasic (passionate) and the Tamasic (dark). Do thou hear of it.

त्रिविधा threefold? भवति is? श्रद्धा faith? देहिनाम् of the embodied? सा that (faith)? स्वभावजा (is) inherent in (their) nature? सात्त्विकी Sattvic (pure)? राजसी Rajasic (passionate)? च and? एव even? तामसी Tamasic (dark)? च and? इति thus? ताम् it? श्रृणु hear (thou).Commentary The whole world is made up? as if were? of faith. Faith assumes a threefold aspect under the influence of the three alities. When Sattva is strongly developed? when there is a preponderance of Sattva or purity in a man? it is easy for him to attain Selfrealisation or the knowledge of the Self. If Rajas is predominant? the faith becomes the handmaid of activity. If Tamas or inertia prevails? faith is annihilated.Those who are endowed with Sattvic faith aim at the attainment of liberation. Those who are endowed with Rajasic faith run after inferior duties or worldly activities. Those whose faith is Tamasic are cruel. They kill animals for sacrifice. They invoke the spirits and talk with ghosts. When faith is joined to Sattva? it leads to salvation. When Rajas preponderates? it colours the faith and leads to various activities. When Tamas predominates? the faith results in darkness.Faith acires different alities when it is in company with the mind of man. Mind is a thing of many colours. Just as the water of the Ganga is contaminated by being put in a vessel where lior had been kept? so also a virtuous person is spoiled by bad company or constant association with evil persons. The three Gunas or attributes colour the faith of a man. The mind of a man is governed by the preponderating attribute or ality which manifests itself when the other two alities are suppressed. Faith takes a threefold aspect in accordance with the inherent nature or tendencies of the man. The inclinations of men are moulded according to their ality or inherent nature born of their past Samskaras.As is the tendency? so is the desire as is the desire? so is the action as is the action? so is the birth into another being after death. The body is like the seed of the tree? a perpetual chain. Seed perishes in developing into a tree and the tree again produces the seed. This process or cycle continues eternally. Even so man takes a body? does actions? develops tendencies? dies and puts,on a new body in accordance with the nature or tendencies. This continues till he gets knowledge of the Self by transcending the three Gunas? when ignorance? the root cause of birth and death? is destroyed.Faith is born of the individual nature? i.e.? the Samskaras or the latent impressions of virtuous and vicious actions which were performed in the past births and which manifested themselves at the time of death. In the subconscious mind or the Chitta there is a reservoir of past impressions which are revived through the operation of memory.Sattvic Faith in the worship of gods? which is an effect of Sattva.Rajasic Faith in the worship of the Yakshas and Rakshasas? which is an effect of Rajas.Tamasic Faith in the worship of the disembodied spirits and ghosts? which is an effect of Tamas.Faith is the main support of life. It is not mere intellectual belief or blind acceptance of pet dogmas or doctrines. You must understand clearly its characteristics? just as you recognise a tree from the fruits? the mind of a man from his speech? and the actions of previous birth from worldly pleasures and pains.Svabhavaja Inherent in their nature born of past Samskaras.Tam Of it? referring to the threefold faith.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Lord Shri Krishna replied: Man has an inherent faith in one or another of the Qualities -Purity, Passion and Ignorance. Now listen.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
As an introduction to His main discourse, the Lord says that faith is of three kinds: Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic. Our vasanas correspond to our faith, and they determine our outlook on life. All our thoughts, emotions, and actions align with this outlook. Therefore, it is natural that a person's physical actions, mental behavior, and intellectual structure are all determined by their faith. Thus, every person is what their faith is; this is the law. The more a person identifies with their body, the grosser and firmer is their ego. This depends on the proportion of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. The Lord explains this in reference to the three Gunas.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The Bhagavat said  The faith of the embodied persons is born of their nature and is of three kinds [viz৷৷]  that which is made of the Sattva ;  that which is made of the Rajas ;  and that which is made of the Tamas.  Listen about them.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Lord said  Threefold is the faith of embodied beings, born of their own nature, constituted of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Listen now about it.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The Blessed Lord said  That faith of the embodied beings, born of their own nature, is threefold-born of sattva, rajas and tamas. Hear about it.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya notes that in response to Arjuna's query, the Lord divides faith into three types according to the Gunas. This clarifies that even without scriptural training, the latent nature (Svabhava) of a person determines the class of their faith.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that a specific answer to Arjuna's general question is impossible without division. The Lord explains that faith is born of nature (Svabhava), which means the latent impressions of virtue and vice from past lives that manifest at the time of death. Anandgiri traces how this latent nature manifests as Sattvic, Rajasic, or Tamasic faith.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The Blessed Lord said: The faith of the embodied souls, born of their own nature, is of three kinds—Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic. Listen to it from Me.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that faith is 'Svabhavaja'—born of one's own nature (past impressions), not necessarily from scriptures or association. While in bondage, both Rajasic and Tamasic faith belong to the lower nature, there is a difference in their binding force. Rajasic people perform scriptural actions with desires and return to the mortal world after enjoying heaven. Tamasic people act without scriptural authority and fall into lower states. To clarify this, the Lord divides faith into three types and asks Arjuna to listen to them individually.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The Lord said  'Threefold is the faith among all' embodied beings. And it arises from their 'inborn nature.' What is called Svabhava is the state unie to one's own nature. It is the special taste or predilection caused by previous subtle impressions, 'Vasanas.' To whatever one's predilection is directed, there faith is born in respect of it. For 'faith' is zeal or eagerness about any means in the belief that it is the way of action to achieve one's own desired object. Vasana (subtle impression), Ruci (taste) and Sraddha (faith) are the alities of the self born from its association with the Gunas. The Sattva and the other Gunas are the alities of the body, the senses, the internal organs and sense-objects. They bring about their alities in the self associated with them. These are the Vasanas. These Gunas can be described only by their effects. These (i.e., Vasanas etc.) originate from experiences with the body etc., having origination in Sattva and other Gunas. Thus faith is threefold as marked by Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Listen about this faith.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Trividha etc.  Here the ideas is this :-  What is termed scripture is indeed the one which is not created by the intellect soiled by any partisan spirit;  further it is of the form of the firmness of the recollection;  and it is firmly recollected because of the sovereign freedom of the awareness;  likewise it is also of the nature of fruit etc., i.e. the nature of  the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate purport of speech, a flow of the pure Self-Consciousness; because of its free course, it starts from the internal nature of awareness and goes as for as the external flow,  beginning from the subtlest hymn (Om), down to the series of  popular saying well-known in the worldly activities.  'What [the sage] says -
 
'Also the [injunctions based on]  remembrance and the virtuous conduct of  the knowers of that [constitute authority]'.  (Gautamadharmasutra, I, 2).
 
That scripture, by its own nature, distinguishes what is to be done and what is not to be done, in order to teach what is beneficial and what is not beneficial.
 
[Further],  he whose heart is very tender by nature, because of the excess of  the Sattva (i.e., godness) - in whatever way he behaves, that has certainly a scriptural authority.  But other person who is made dirty by the Rajas or the Tamas  (i.e., desire and ignorance) does not act rightly, even while performing what is enjoined in the scriptures.  For, he does not follow  the purport (the spirit) of the scripture  in its entity.  The scripture (or what is enjoined in the scripture) bears fruits only in the case of men of the Sattva (goodness)  This has been declared by the scripture itself as :
 
'He  [alone]  enjoys the fruit of the scripture (or holy bathing place)  whose arms and feet and also mind, learning, austerity and conduct are controlled properly'.										(MB, Aranyaka, Ch. 80, verse 30).
 
Any other person does not enjoy  [the fruit], because the rmains unsubdued [in his mind].  Therefore, what is prescribed in the scripture bears fruit in the case of those who have abandoned desire, anger and delusion.  This is the purport of the present chapter; and it is being elaborated  [throughout].  But it is not explained  [in every  place by us (Ag.), because the idea is clear enough.  But [the concerned verses] are simply written only to remove doubts regarding the readings [of the passages concerned].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sa, that; sraddha, faith, the state about which you ask; dehinam, of the embodied beings; svabhavaja, born of their own nature-by svabhava (nature) is meant that latent impression of virtuous acts etc. acired in the past lives, which becomes manifest at the time of death; what arises out of that is svabhavaja-; is trividha, threefold, of three kinds; sattviki, born of sattva, and related to worship of gods, etc.; rajasi, born of rajas, concerning worship of Yaksas (a class of demi-gods, Kubera and others), Raksas (ogres, Nairrti and others); and tamasi, born of tamas, concerning worship of ghosts, goblins and others. Thus it is of three kinds. Srnu, hear; tam, about it, that faith, as it is being stated.
That (faith) is threefold as follows:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that in response to Arjuna's query about the status of those who act with faith but without scriptural knowledge, the Lord classifies their faith as Sattvic, Rajasic, or Tamasic. This shows that their standing is not uniform but depends on the predominant quality of their nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that the Lord answers Arjuna's query by declaring that the faith of all embodied beings is threefold—Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic—born of their own nature (latent impressions from past lives). This division is crucial because the results of their actions will vary according to the nature of their faith.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the Lord describes the threefold faith of embodied beings. Since people do not have uniform tendencies, their faith, which is born of their past impressions (Svabhava), is either Sattvic, Rajasic, or Tamasic. Arjuna must hear about this to understand their final outcome.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that the Lord starts explaining the divisions of faith in response to Arjuna's query. Faith is born of a person's nature, which is formed by the virtuous and vicious impressions of past lives. He directs Arjuna to listen to the descriptions of these three types.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the Lord classifies faith to show that the result of actions depends on the qualities of the performer. The word 'Dehinaam' (of the embodied) indicates that faith is conditioned by the type of body and mind they possess. This faith is 'Svabhavaja' (born of nature), meaning it arises from रुचि (taste or predilection) which is built upon past latent impressions (Vasanas). He urges Arjuna to listen to understand how these qualities manifest.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that the faith of worldly, embodied beings is classified here. Unlike the single, pure faith that leads to devotion and is directed toward the Lord, the faith born of qualities (Gunas) and nature (Svabhava) is threefold. The Lord tells Arjuna to listen to the descriptions of these three types to clear all doubts.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the Lord answers Arjuna's general question by stating that faith is born of nature (Svabhava), which represents the virtuous and vicious deeds of past lives. If one performed Sattvic deeds in the past, their faith in this life is Sattvic. If Rajasic, it is Rajasic; and if Tamasic, it is Tamasic. This faith governs their worship and inclinations.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: According to the modes of nature acquired by the embodied soul, one’s faith can be of three kinds – in goodness, in passion or in ignorance. Now hear about this.

 Those who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures but out of laziness or indolence give up following these rules and regulations are governed by the modes of material nature. According to their previous activities in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, they acquire a nature which is of a specific quality. The association of the living entity with the different modes of nature has been going on perpetually; since the living entity is in contact with material nature, he acquires different types of mentality according to his association with the material modes. But this nature can be changed if one associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by his rules and the scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position from ignorance to goodness, or from passion to goodness. The conclusion is that blind faith in a particular mode of nature cannot help a person become elevated to the perfectional stage. One has to consider things carefully, with intelligence, in the association of a bona fide spiritual master. Thus one can change his position to a higher mode of nature.