Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
satkāramānapūjārthaṃ tapo dambhena caiva yat .
kriyate tadiha proktaṃ rājasaṃ calamadhruvam

Word Meanings:
सत्कारमानपूजार्थम् - for ostentation, honor, and reverence
तपः - austerity
दम्भेन - with hypocrisy
च - and
एव - even
यत् - which
क्रियते - is practised
तत् - that
इह - here
प्रोक्तम् - is said
राजसम् - Rajasic
चलम् - unstable
अध्रुवम् - transitory.

Life Application:
Avoid performing good deeds or self-discipline merely to gain praise, public honor, or showy status.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The austerity which is practiced for the sake of welcome, honor, and worship, and with hypocrisy, is here said to be Rajasic, unstable, and transitory.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The austerity which is practised with the object of gaining good reception, honour and worship, and with hypocrisy, is here said to be Rajasic, unstable and transitory.

सत्कारमानपूजार्थम् with the object of gaining good reception? honour and worship? तपः austerity? दम्भेन with hypocrisy? च and? एव even? यत् which? क्रियते is practised? तत् that? इह here? प्रोक्तम् is said? राजसम् Rajasic? चलम् unstable? अध्रुवम् transitory.Commentary Penance that is performed with no sincere belief? for mere show? with a view to increase selfimportance? in order that the world may pay respect to the performer and place him in the seat of honour? and that everyone may sing his praise? is declared to be of a passionate nature.Iha In this world Such penance yields fruit only in this world.Satkara Good reception with such words as? Here is a good Brahmana of great austerities.Mana Honour Rising from ones seat to greet? and saluting with reverence.Chalam Unstable Yielding momentary effect or result.Adhruvam Without Niyama or fixity.Penance that is performed in the hope of gaining fame is worse than useless. It bears no fruit. It is abandoned though incomplete? when it is seen that is can result in no gain.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Austerity coupled with hypocrisy or performed for the sake of self-glorification, popularity or vanity, comes from Passion, and its result is always doubtful and temporary.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Austerity performed for self-glorification, popularity, and vanity (dambhena) is Rajasic. It is described as unstable (chalam) and temporary (adhruvam) because welcome, honor, and praise are temporary social reactions, and when the motive is shallow, the practice itself lacks consistency.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The austerity that is practised for gaining respect, honour and reverence and with sheer showing-that is called here [austerity] of the Rajas and it is unstable and impermanent.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That austerity, pracitsed with ostentation for the sake of gaininng respect, praise and reverence, is here said to be Rajasa. It is unsteady and impermanent.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
That austerity which is undertaken for earning a name, being honoured and worshipped, and also ostentatiously,-that is spoken of as born of rajas, belonging to this world, uncertain and transitory.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that Rajasic austerity is performed to obtain praise, respect (such as rising from seats), and worship (such as washing feet). Because it is based on hypocrisy and showing off, its results are uncertain and confined to this world, lasting only a short time.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The austerity which is practiced for the sake of welcome, honor, and worship, and with hypocrisy, is here said to be Rajasic, unstable, and transitory.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains the three goals of Rajasic austerity: 'Satkara' refers to external greetings and praise from others; 'Mana' refers to others holding a high opinion of the performer in their hearts; 'Puja' refers to physical worship, such as washing feet, presenting flowers, etc. 'Dambhena' means showing off without internal faith. Since this austerity is performed for praise and show, its result is declared as 'chalam' (perishable) and 'adhruvam' (uncertain). It brings only worldly fame and finishes here.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Respect' means recognition by others. 'Praise' means verbal adulation. 'Reverence' means corporeal actions such as prostration etc. That austerity, practised with expectation of rewards like respect, etc., mentioned above - it is here said to be Rajasa. It is unsteady and impermanent, because of the temporary nature of its rewards like heaven etc.; 'unsteadiness' is the result of the fear of falling. 'Impermanent' means the tendency to perish.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.17–17.19 jointly): Sraddhaya etc. upto tamasam udahrtam.  There is faith in all the three-fold austerity.  the faith of a man of the Sattva is full of austerity itself.  The faith of a man of the Rajas is in the Rajas i.e, showing  (or hyprocricy) etc.  But, the faith (or desire) of a man well established in the Tamas  is merely in ruining others.  Thus the sage speaks of all the three-fold austerity practised with faith.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yat, that; tapah, austerity; which is kriyate, undertaken; satkara-mana-pujartham, for earning a name, being honoured and worshipped-for earning a name, (i.e.) for being spoken of thus: 'This Brahmana, who is given to austerity, is pious'; for being honoured by (others') standing up respectfully, salutation, etc.; for being worshipped with washing of feet, adoration, feeding, etc.; for these-; ca eva, and also, (that) austerity which is performed dambhena, ostentatiously; tat, that; proktam, is spoken of; as rajasam, born of rajas; iha, belonging to this world; [i.e. yielding fruits only in this world.] calam, uncertain-its result being unpredictable; and adhruvam, transitory.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains: 'Satkara' is praise from the ignorant; 'Mana' is respect shown through rising or saluting; 'Puja' is adoration through foot-washing or gifts. Austerity performed for these reasons and with hypocrisy, without true faith, is declared as Rajasic. Its result is very short-lived (chalam) and unpredictable (adhruvam), yielding fruit only in this world.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that 'Satkara' is verbal worship (praise); 'Mana' is bodily respect (standing up or saluting); and 'Puja' is material offerings (money or gifts). Austerity performed for these and with hypocrisy is Rajasic, and is unstable and momentary.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that 'Satkara' is praise ('this is a holy ascetic'); 'Mana' is respect like rising or bowing; 'Puja' is offerings of food or wealth. Austerity performed out of hypocrisy for these ends is Rajasic, and its results are temporary and uncertain, lasting only as long as the show lasts.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'Satkara' is mental respect; 'Mana' is verbal praise; 'Puja' is physical prostration. Austerity performed with hypocrisy for these ends is called Rajasic. It is unstable and temporary due to the perishable nature of its worldly fruits.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that Rajasic austerity is performed to gain verbal praise (Satkara), social elevation like high seats (Mana), and material offerings (Puja). Because it is based on deceit and showing off, it is called unstable and has no spiritual value for the next world.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'Satkara' is verbal worship, 'Mana' is bodily respect, and 'Puja' is material gains. Austerity performed for these is Rajasic, and its results are perishable (chalam) and uncertain (adhruvam).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Penance performed out of pride and for the sake of gaining respect, honor and worship is said to be in the mode of passion. It is neither stable nor permanent.

 Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and receive honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode of passion arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their feet and offer riches. Such arrangements artificially made by the performance of penances are considered to be in the mode of passion. The results are temporary; they can be continued for some time, but they are not permanent.