Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
maccittaḥ sarvadurgāṇi matprasādāttariṣyasi .
atha cettvamahaṃkārānna śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi

Word Meanings:
मच्चित्तः - fixing thy mind on
सर्वदुर्गाणि - all obstacles
मत्प्रसादात् - by My grace
तरिष्यसि - shalt overcome
अथ - now
चेत् - if
त्वम् - thou
अहङ्कारात् - from egoism
न - not
श्रोष्यसि - wilt hear
विनङ्क्ष्यसि - shalt perish.

Life Application:
Fix your mind on God to overcome all obstacles, avoiding self-importance that leads to ruin.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Fixing your mind on Me, you shall overcome all difficulties by My grace. But if, due to egoism, you do not listen to Me, you shall perish.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Fixing thy mind on Me, thou shalt by My grace overcome all obstacles; but if from egoism thou wilt not hear Me, thou shalt perish.

मच्चित्तः fixing thy mind on Me? सर्वदुर्गाणि all obstacles? मत्प्रसादात् by My grace? तरिष्यसि (thou) shalt overcome? अथ now? चेत् if? त्वम् thou? अहङ्कारात् from egoism? न not? श्रोष्यसि (thou) wilt hear? विनङ्क्ष्यसि (thou) shalt perish.Commentary When thy mind? O Arjuna? through onepointed devoion is fixed on Me? thou shalt by My grace cross over all difficulties and obstacles. But shouldst thou not take My teaching to heart and through pride disregard it? thou shalt be ruined.Difficulties Obstacles? snares? pitfalls? temptations on the spiritual path and various sorts of other difficulties of Samsara? diseases? etc.Egosim The idea that thou art a learned man. Thou shouldst not think I am independent. I know everything. I am a wise man. Why should I take the advice of another

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Fix but thy mind on Me, and by My grace thou shalt overcome the obstacles in thy path. But if, misled by pride, thou wilt not listen, then indeed thou shalt be lost.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In summary, a seeker must perform his duties while constantly remembering God. Through constant practice, the body and mind also begin to support such an inspired intellect which delights in the uninterrupted remembrance of God. Lord Krishna says, by fixing your mind on Me, you shall overcome all difficulties by My grace. Most of the obstacles in our life are imaginary, born of false fears and futile worries. But if, due to egoism, you do not listen to Me, you shall perish. Perishing here means that such an arrogant person cannot attain the supreme goal of life. Arrogance leads to ignoring the inner voice and following a lower life of sense-enjoyment, resulting in spiritual ruin.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Having your thought-organ turned towards Me, you shall pass over all obstacles by  Me Grace.  On the other hand, if you don't give up your sense of ego, you will not liberated yourself,  [instead] you will perish.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Focusing your thought on Me, you shall, by My grace, cross over all difficulties. If, however, out of self-conceit, you do not heed Me, you shall perish.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Having your mind fixed on Me, you will cross over all difficulties through My grace. If, on the other hand, you do not listen out of egotism, you will get destroyed.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Resorting to Me, you will overcome all worldly difficulties by My grace. But if, due to egoism (arising from thinking oneself to be a scholar or a knower), you do not listen, you will lose the supreme goal of life.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Fixing your mind on Me, you shall overcome all difficulties by My grace. But if, due to egoism, you do not listen to Me, you shall perish.

Commentary: The Lord gives a double warning here. On the positive side, if we surrender our mind to God, His divine grace (Prasada) takes charge and carries us safely over all worldly obstacles (durgani). On the negative side, if due to arrogance ('I know what is best for me', 'I am wise'), we reject the Lord's guidance, we will surely ruin ourselves and fail to achieve the goal of life.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Thus, focusing your thought on Me, if you can perform all acts, you will, by My grace, cross over all difficulties of Samsara. If, however, out of 'self-conceit,' i.e., out of the feeling, 'I know well what is to be done and what is not to be done' - out of such a feeling, if you do not heed My words, you shall perish. Except Myself, there is none who knows what ought and what ought not to be done by all living beings; there is also none other than Myself who is in the position of a law-giver to them.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Maccittah, having your mind fixed on Me; tarisyasi, you will cross over; sarva-durgani, alldifficulties, all cuases of transmigration which are difficult to overcome; mat-prasadat, through My grace. Atha cet, if, on the other hand; tvam, you; na srosyasi, will not listen to, will not accept, My words; ahankarat, out of egotism, thinking 'I am learned'; then vinanksyasi, you will get destroyed, will court ruin.
And this should not be thought of by you-'I am independent. Why should I follow another's bidding?'

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Therefore, keep in mind what is going to happen next: 'Fixing your mind on Me, you shall overcome all difficulties (troubles, hardships).' This is the rationale in 'But if...'. Fearing that you might align with other opinions, the Lord says: if you do not listen, you shall perish like a worldly person.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
In this verse, the Lord states the fruit of such a state: 'Fixing your mind on Me, you will cross over all difficulties, i.e., all worldly miseries which are causes of bondage, through My grace.' The Lord shows the defect in the opposite case: 'But if, due to egoism (arising from thinking "I am wise"), you do not listen to My words, you will perish, i.e., you will fall away from the human goal (liberation).'

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Hear what will happen next—'maccittaḥ': being with your mind fixed on Me, by My grace you will cross over all difficulties, which are the insurmountable worldly miseries. He states the defect in the opposite case—'atha cet': if, due to egoism (arising from thinking oneself to be the knower), you do not listen to these words of Mine, you will perish, i.e., you will fall away from the human goal.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
In response to what happens next, the Lord says: 'maccittaḥ': fixing your mind on Me, you will cross over all difficulties, which are the causes of bondage like ignorance, by My grace. He states the defect in the opposite case: 'atha cet': if, due to egoism (thinking 'I am a wise pundit, what I have decided by my own intellect is correct'), you do not listen, i.e., do not accept My instruction, you will perish, i.e., you will go to ruin and fall away from the supreme human goal.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Thus, performing all actions with your mind fixed on Me, you will cross over all difficulties by My grace. 'Difficulties' means all worldly obstacles that lead to bondage. He points out the sin or harm in not doing so with the words 'atha cet' (but if). The cause of ignoring beneficial advice is the specific form of egoism: 'I alone know what should be done and what should not.' 'If you do not listen' means you will not achieve the fruit. 'You will perish' means you will remain lost in the cycle of births, which is equivalent to spiritual ruin.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The Lord states the fruit for such a person: 'maccittaḥ': being with your mind fixed on Me, you will cross over all difficulties, which are worldly and other-worldly crises, even while performing actions, through My grace, since you act according to My command. He states the obstacle in the opposite case: 'atha': in another way, if due to egoism (arising from pride in your own knowledge) you think action is inevitable and therefore decide not to perform it, and do not listen to Me, you will perish, i.e., you will fall away from My connection.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The Lord explains the benefit of performing this Bhakti-yoga and the defect in not performing it: 'maccittaḥ': fixing your mind on Me. 'Difficulties' means spiritual, material, and other crises. If, out of egoism (pride in your own learning), you do not listen to My words, you will perish, i.e., you will remain devoid of the human goal of life.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost.

 A person in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not unduly anxious about executing the duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this great freedom from all anxiety. For one who acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Lord Kṛṣṇa becomes the most intimate friend. He always looks after His friend’s comfort, and He gives Himself to His friend, who is so devotedly engaged working twenty-four hours a day to please the Lord. Therefore, no one should be carried away by the false ego of the bodily concept of life. One should not falsely think himself independent of the laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under strict material laws. But as soon as he acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is liberated, free from the material perplexities. One should note very carefully that one who is not active in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is losing himself in the material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth and death. No conditioned soul actually knows what is to be done and what is not to be done, but a person who acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is free to act because everything is prompted by Kṛṣṇa from within and confirmed by the spiritual master.