Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
avācyavādāṃśca bahūnvadiṣyanti tavāhitāḥ .
nindantastava sāmarthyaṃ tato duḥkhataraṃ nu kim

Word Meanings:
अवाच्यवादान् - words that are improper
च - and
बहून् - many
वदिष्यन्ति - will say
तव - thy
अहिताः - enemies
निन्दन्तः - disparaging
तव - thy
सामर्थ्यम् - power
ततः - than this
दुःखतरम् - more painful
नु - indeed
किम् - what.

Life Application:
Consider how backing down from your obligations damages your self-respect and invites justified criticism.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Your enemies, slandering your prowess, will speak many unspeakable words. What could be more painful than that?

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Thy enemies also, cavilling at thy power, will speak many abusive words. What is more painful than this?

अवाच्यवादान् words that are improper to be spoken? च and? बहून् many? वदिष्यन्ति will say? तव thy? अहिताः enemies? निन्दन्तः cavilling? तव thy? सामर्थ्यम् power? ततः than this? दुःखतरम् more painful? नु indeed? किम् what.Commentary There is really no pain more unbearable and tormenting that that of slander thus incurred.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Thine enemies will spread scandal and mock at thy courage. Can anything be more humiliating?

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Seeing that these arguments are favourably affecting Arjuna's mind, Sri Krishna makes even more explicit the faults of fleeing from battle: public censure, the accusation of desertion, and infamy in history. For a man of honour, what greater pain could there be than these?

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Slandering your ability,  the enemies will talk of you many sayings that should not be talked of.  Is there anything more painful than that ?

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Your enemies, slandering your prowess, will use words which should never be uttered. What could be more painful than that?

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And your enemies will speak many indecent words while denigrating your might. What can be more painful than that?

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Krishna says this further so that Arjuna will not withdraw from battle: 'Moreover...' Fearing that Arjuna, unable to bear the greater grief caused by killing Bhishma, Drona and others, might withdraw from war thinking he could instead bear the enemy's slander of his prowess, Krishna refutes this apprehension by saying 'than that...'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Your enemies will speak many unspeakable words slandering your prowess. What sorrow could be greater than that? Explanation: 'ahita' means one who does harm, an enemy. Duryodhana, Duhshasana, Karna and your other enemies, even though you bear no enmity towards them, are themselves bent on harming you. They know your strength, that you are a great warrior; yet knowing this they will still slander your prowess, calling you impotent, saying you fled at the moment of battle, asking whether you can stand before them or fight them at all. In this way, to grieve you and to kindle inner torment, they will utter countless unspeakable words. How will you bear them? What sorrow could be more terrible than that? Just as a man who cannot endure insult from lowly people exceeds his own strength and courage even unto death, so too, when the enemies heap wholly unjust insult upon you, you will not be able to bear it, and driven by passion you will leap into battle. Connection: having described in the previous four verses the harm of not fighting, the Lord now describes in the next two verses the gain from fighting.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Moreover, your enemies, the sons of Dhrtarastra, will make many remarks unutterably slanderous and disparaging to heroes, saying, 'How can this Partha stand in the presence of us, who are heroes, even for a moment?  His prowess is elsewhere than in our presence.' Can there be anything more painful to you than this?  You yourself will understand that death is preferable to subjection to disparagement of this kind.

Sri Krsna now says that for a hero, enemies being slain by oneself and oneself being slain by enemies are both conducive to supreme bliss.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 2.33–2.37 jointly): Atha ca etc., upto krta-niscavah.  Accepting what the opponent has stated, this pentad of verses is narrated as an argument : 'If your goodself prefers to abide by the generally accepted practice, even then this [fighting] must be undertaken necessarily'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Ca, and besieds; tava, your; ahitah, enemies; vadisyanti, will speak; bahun, many, various kinds of; avacya-vadan, indecent words, unutterable words; nindantah, while denigrating, scorning; tava, your; samarthyam, might earned from battles against Nivatakavaca and others. Therefore, kim nu, what can be; duhkhataram, more painful; tatah, than that, than the sorrow arising from being scorned? That is to say, there is no greater pain than it.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Moreover, 'unspeakable words' -- this is self-evident.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Now, if it be thought that great warriors like Bhishma will not think much of your withdrawal, but enemies like Duryodhana will value it highly since it benefits them, Krishna refutes this: slandering your extraordinary, world-renowned prowess, your enemies Duryodhana and others will utter many unspeakable words, calling you impotent and such, not esteem you at all. Or else: they will slander your praiseworthy prowess with unspeakable words. Further, fearing Arjuna might think that though unable to bear the greater grief of killing Bhishma, Drona and others, he could still bear the grief of the enemies' slander if he withdraws from battle, Krishna says: what could be more painful than the grief born of such reproach? There is nothing more painful than this.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover: your enemies will speak unspeakable words, words unfit to be uttered.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
It is not merely that they will think this of you; rather, being hostile, they will also utter unspeakable words such as calling you impotent. 'Avacya' means words unfit to be spoken. There is no pain more painful than that arising from incurring such reproach.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Having described the past wrong done to you and the further diminishing of your honour to come, Krishna strengthens the point that grief is out of place, given yet another future wrong. He explains the manner of the slander of your prowess: your enemies, the sons of Dhritarashtra, will speak to you, before heroes, many words that are never spoken to heroes but only to cowards -- harsh, indecent, mocking words. Even if Bhishma, Drona, Kripa or Shalya said something, it could be endured out of respect for their stature; but how could you bear the many unspeakable words spoken by unheroic men who merely pose as heroes and who have done you great harm? Since such intensified expressions of pain apply to your own direct experience, and you are no ordinary, indifferent person, this pain is unbearable. You yourself will conclude: when your prowess with the Gandiva is insulted, you would be ready even to slay Yudhishthira, let alone Karna and others -- so even if you withdraw now, unbearable pain will later drive you to fight.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover, slandering your prowess, your enemies will speak many unspeakable words, words unfit to be uttered. 'Nu' denotes certainty. What could be more painful than that? Nothing whatsoever.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Moreover, 'unspeakable words' means words unfit to be spoken, such as calling you impotent, Arjuna. 'Slandering your prowess' means saying, 'Cursed be his valour, who fled out of fear of Bhishma and others.' Such words are more painful than death itself. What sorrow could be greater than this? None at all.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Your enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your ability. What could be more painful for you?

 Lord Kṛṣṇa was astonished in the beginning at Arjuna’s uncalled-for plea for compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting the non-Āryans. Now in so many words, He has proved His statements against Arjuna’s so-called compassion.