Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yasya nāhaṃkṛto bhāvo buddhiryasya na lipyate .
hatvā.api sa imā.Nllokānna hanti na nibadhyate

Word Meanings:
यस्य - whose
न - not
अहंकृतः - egoistic
भावः - the notion
बुद्धिः - intelligence
यस्य - of whom
न - not
लिप्यते - is tainted
हत्वा - having slain
अपि - even
सः - he
इमान् - these
लोकान् - people
न - not
हन्ति - slays
न - not
निबध्यते - is bound.

Life Application:
He who is free from egoistic notion, whose intellect is untainted—though he slay these worlds, he slays not, nor is bound.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He who has no egoistic notion, and whose intellect is not tainted (by good or evil), even though he kills these worlds, he kills not, nor is he bound (by sin).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He who is free from the egoistic notion, whose intelligence is not tainted (by good or evil), 
though he slays these people, he slayeth not, nor is he bound (by the action).

यस्य whose? न not? अहंकृतः egoistic? भावः the notion? बुद्धिः intelligence? यस्य of whom? न not? लिप्यते is tainted? हत्वा having slain? अपि even? सः he? इमान् these? लोकान् people? न not? हन्ति slays? न not? निबध्यते is bound.Commentary I will explain to thee? O Arjuna? the characterisitics of the man who has transcended activity? and who has gone beyond the bonds of Karma.When selfishnes and egoism are destroyed? when desire and personal gain are renounced? actions cannot bind a man. He knows that the Self is not destroyed when the body perishes. He has no idea of agency. The act of killing itself? in his case? becomes one necessary for the peace and harmony of the world. His killing without desire is like the killing of a murderer by the executioner and the judge on behalf of the community for the preservation of peace and harmony in the world.He who has a trained intellect? pure understanding and developed reason? who has a knowledge of the scriptures? who has devoted himself to the study of the scriptures? who is eipped with the knowledge of logic? who is well trained by the instructions of his preceptor? is absolutely free from the egoistic notion that I am the agent or the doer. He knows perfectly well that Nature or Guna or ones own nature does everything. He thus thinks I am the silent witness of all activities. I am not the doer. These five (the body? the actor? etc.) which are superimposed on the pure? actionless Self through ignorance are the causes of all actions. I do not do anything. The senses move amongst the senseobjects. The alities (Gunas) move in their counterparts in the senses which are also the products of the Gunas. I know the essence of the divisions of the alities and their functions. I am in essence without limbs. How can action or work be ascribed to me I am without hands? without legs? without feet? without breath and without mind. I am ever pure? spotless and immovable and immutable. He will never repent thus I have done a wrong action. I ought to have done like this. I have done an evil action. I will go to hell. He is always wise. He can,never do a wrong action. His will has become one with the cosmic will. His will has become blended with the will of the Lord. Whatever he does is done by the Lord only. He has no will of his own. He sees rightly. Though he kills? he does not commit the act of killing. He is not bound by the fruit of a vicious action as an effect of that act. He is beyond good and evil? beyond the pairs of opposites? as he has knowledge of the Self.An objector says The statement that though he kills these people? he does not kill? is selfcontradictory.We say This objection is really not tenable. From the worldly point of view the Lord says though he kills? because man identifies the Self with the body? etc.? and thinks I am the killer. From the transcendental point of view explained above? the Lord says? He kills not? he is not bound.Another objector says The Self acts in conjunction with the body? etc.? -- He who looks upon his Self Which is isolated? as the agent৷৷.  (XVIII.16)We say This objection also cannot stand. As the omnipresent ether is not affected by reason of its subtlety? even so the Self? seated everywhere in the body? is not affected. This immortal? immutable? changeless? formless? attributeless Self? though seated in the body? does not act and is not affected? just as the crystal is not affected by the red colour of the flower that comes into contact with it? just as the sun is not affected by the diseases of the eye. A thing that changes only can join with others and become the agent. The Self is always isolated? independent and free. This Self is immutable (II.25). The alities move amidst the alities (III.28). Though seated in the body? He does not act (XIII.31). Actions are wrought by the alities (III.27). You will find in the Brihadaranyaka were. By reasoning also we may establish the same conclusion thusThe Self is indivisible? allpervading? infinite? limbless? without parts? independent? ever free and immutable. Therefore the actions of the body can never be ascribed to the agency of the Self.Verily the actions of one cannot go to another who has not done them. Just as blue colour cannot belong to the sky? silver to the motherofpearl? water to mirage? so also what is ascribed to the Self by ignorance cannot really belong to It. The changes that occur in the body pertain to the body but not to the pure actionless Self which is always the spectator or the silent witness. Therefore? it is right to say that the wise man who is free from egoism and all impurities of the mind? neither kills nor is he bound though he kills.In chapter II.19? the Lord stated the proposition -- He slayeth not? nor is he slain. In chapter II.20? He said The Self is unborn? eternal? ancient the Self is not slain when the body is killed. The Lord has touched here and there that the Self is not affected by works? that there is no necessity for the wise man of doing actions. He concludes that the sage kills not? nor is he bound? and sums up the teaching of the Gita. The teaching of the Gita has been concluded in this verse. The Sannyasins who are free from egoism are not affected by Karma. The threefold fruits of action? viz.? evil? good and mixed (see verse 12 above) do not accrue to them. Those worldlyminded persons who work with egoism and expectation of fruits are tainted by the works. They are forced to experience the fruits of their actions and to take birth again and again. (Cf.II.19V.7)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
He who has no pride, and whose intellect is unalloyed by attachment, even though he kill these people, yet he does not kill them, and his act does not bind him.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The law of action is that he who is the doer of an action is also the enjoyer of its fruit. We have already seen that the insentient limiting adjuncts alone cannot perform action, nor can the conscious Self alone be the doer. The individual soul (jiva) possessing the pride of agency can arise only from ignorance through the mutual relationship of both, because there can be no real relationship between the insentient limiting adjuncts and the conscious Self, which possess contradictory attributes. Therefore, it is clear that without knowing the Self, having attained the state of the individual soul through relationship with the non-Self, a man becomes the doer of auspicious and inauspicious actions, and his intellect is tainted by the fruits in the form of sin and virtue. In the state of ignorance, this bondage is indeed inevitable. In this verse, the man who has attained correct knowledge is described. The ego, i.e., the state of the individual soul, of the knower of the Self vanishes completely. Then it is altogether impossible that his intellect should be attached to any objects or be defiled by virtues and defects. This very fact is stated here in this manner: even though he slays these worlds, (in reality), he slays not, nor is he bound. There is no contradiction in the above statement, because the act of slaying is spoken of from the worldly perspective of the body, etc., and that he slays not is spoken of from the perspective of the Self. When Lord Krishna says that the wise man, even after committing slaughter, does not in reality commit slaughter, it should not be understood that all wise men engage in such low actions as slaughter. The implication of this sentence is only that in the absence of the pride of agency, a man cannot have bondage of any action. In the world also we see that a murderer is given the death penalty, and a brave soldier who kills the enemy on the battlefield is awarded the Mahavir Chakra. Even though the act of killing is identical in both, there is a difference in their results due to the presence or absence of the sense of ego and selfishness. The wise man whose ego is completely destroyed does not have any kind of bondage. After this, Lord Krishna, the teacher of the Gita, describes the impelling or motivating factors of action and the accumulation of action.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
He, whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense  'I', and whose intellect is not stained - he, even if he slays these worlds, does not [really]  slay any and he is not fettered.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who is free from the notion 'I am the doer,' and whose understanding is not tainted - slays not, though he slays all these men, nor is he bound.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
He who has not the feeling of egoism, whose intellect is not tainted, he does not kill, nor does he become bound-even by killing these creatures!

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
He praises that knowledge in: "yasya...". He who is bound slightly is also slightly egoistic.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having taught that the man of perverted view has perverted intellect, He now describes through a question the correct intellect of the man of right view in: "Who, again...?" etc. Raising the doubt: "If there is no notion of agency like 'I am the doer' in the Self, where does the notion of agency reside?", he says: "these...". Raising the doubt: "Then how is the notion of agency in the Self?", he states that it is because the Self is the witness of the seat, etc. and their activities: "But I...". He cites authority for the Self not having the power of activity on its own: "For it is without vital force...". Nor does it have the power of knowledge on its own: "without mind...". He states the resulting purity in the absence of connection with the two limiting adjuncts: "pure...". To the doubt of impurity due to connection with cause, it is said: "higher than the immutable...". To the doubt of dualism when the effect and cause are separated from the Self by not touching it, he says: "No, because they are unreal": "absolute...". He states its immutability by its being devoid of all modifications like birth, etc.: "changeless...". He explains "whose intellect..." as: "intellect...". "does not repent" means does not possess regret, i.e., is not afflicted with pain. Having stated the literal meaning of the second quarter, he states the meaning of the sentence: "this...". "this" refers to sinful action. To the doubt: "Since the worlds have no connection with vital force, how can there be killing?", he says: "living beings...". Objection: "Even praise is improper by stating contradictory meanings." Thus he objects in: "but...". He refutes the contradiction: "This fault does not arise". Relying on the worldly view, he clarifies the specification "even though killing" as: "identifying with the body, etc.". Relying on the transcendental view, he establishes the specification "slays not", etc.: "as...". The transcendental view should be understood as shown, in the form: "I am not the doer, but the witness of the doer and its activities; I am pure, free from the two limiting adjuncts of action and knowledge, free from relationship with cause and effect, non-dual, and changeless." He concludes that both "even though killing" and "he slays not", etc., are reasonable by relying on the two views: "both...". Objection: "By the force of the word 'kevalam' (alone/absolute) which serves as an adjective to the Self in 'looks upon the absolute Self as the doer, he of perverted intellect...', the agency belongs to the qualified Self." Thus he objects in: "but...". He refutes: "This fault does not arise", because the Self cannot have qualifications, hence even the qualified Self cannot have agency. To the doubt: "Even if it is changeless by nature, how is the Self unassociated?", he says: "associated...". Even if the Self is associated with the seat, etc., it cannot have agency because the changeless Self cannot have connection with action. He says this in: "being conjoined...". He clarifies the impossibility of conjunction: "but not...". He states the result of being unassociated: "thus not...". Then how is absoluteness stated in the Self by the word "kevala"? He states that: "therefore...". To the doubt: "The non-agency of the Self is accepted, but its immutability is not accepted", he says: "and the immutability...". He cites Smriti texts in support of that: "this is said to be changeless...". The words "this slays not, nor is slain" (Gita 2.19), etc., are meant by the word "etc.". He indicates the purport of the stated texts in the immutability of the Self: "repeatedly...". The texts like "without parts, without activity, peaceful" (Svetasvatara Upanishad 6.19), etc. in the Sruti are meant by the word "etc.". The construction is: by these texts, the immutability of the Self is shown. He shows the reasoning itself: "without parts...". The meaning is: first, the Self does not modify on its own because it is without parts, like ether; nor due to another, because the unattached and uncreated Self cannot be dependent on another. Further, is the modification of the Self located in itself, or in the seat, etc.? Not the first, because the impossibility of modification located in the Self has been shown. With this intent he says: "the state of possessing modifications...". And that has been said to be improper, is the remainder. He refutes the second in: "No..." etc. Raising the doubt: "Even though action is performed by the seat, etc., it comes to the Self due to connection with them", and choosing whether that coming is real or illusory, he refutes the first: "For not...". He refutes the second in: "As for...". He establishes that action brought to the Self by ignorance does not belong to it, by two illustrations: "just as..." etc. He states the result of the absence of agency due to the immutability of the Self: "therefore...". Objection: "But the immutability of the Self was established before itself; why is it stated here?" To this he says: "this...". The connection is: having briefly stated with reasons at the beginning of the scripture what was proposed, and having discussed it here and there in the middle, He concludes here the cessation of qualification for action which was expounded. To the question: "Why is there a conclusion at the end of what was proposed and established with reasons?", he says: "for the sake of the scripture's purpose...". Since it is established that there is no qualification for action in the case of the wise man, because when the identification with the body is absent, the renunciation of all actions born of ignorance is accomplished, he concludes the principal topic under discussion by stating that it is indeed proper that the threefold fruit of action — undesirable, desirable, and mixed — does not accrue to sannyasis: "and thus...". He concludes the meaning established by the statement of reasons that in the case of the unwise who identify with the body, the threefold fruit of action is indeed possible: "and from its reverse...". He briefly states the concluded meaning that action performed by the seat, etc. is not performed by the Self; that qualification for action belongs only to the unwise because, due to identification with the body, they cannot renounce it; whereas in the case of the wise, due to the absence of identification with the body, there is cessation of qualification for action: "thus this...". And he says that the stated meaning of the Gita must be accepted because it is the meaning of the Vedas: "this itself...". How can this meaning be understood as the meaning of the Vedas also? To this he says: "carefully..."

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense of "I", and whose intellect is not tainted, even though he slays these worlds, yet he does not slay, nor is he bound. Commentary — yasya nāhaṃkṛto bhāvo buddhiryasya na lipyate — He in whose case, when the activity of the seat, etc. occurs, there is no egoistic notion like: "I am the doer", and whose intellect has no taint in the form: "I will get the fruit" — which is a selfish motive. It should be understood like this: just as scripturally ordained and scripturally forbidden activities occur in one light and are dependent on light, but light never becomes the doer of any activity — i.e., light neither performs nor causes those activities to be performed. Similarly, without the presence of the Self, no activity — ordained or forbidden — can occur, but that Self neither performs nor causes those activities to be performed. One who directly experiences this, has no egoistic notion like: "I am the performer of actions", and has no taint (delusion of pairs of opposites) in the intellect in the form: "I want this, I do not want this; this event should happen, this event should not happen". Due to the absence of the egoistic notion and taint in the intellect, both his agency and experiencing are destroyed; i.e., he directly experiences that both agency and experiencing do not exist in himself. The effects of Nature are going on naturally and changing, and one's own Self is merely its illuminator — established in this manner in one's own Self, he has no egoistic notion like "I do", because the egoistic notion occurs only by accepting the body, which is an effect of Nature, as one's own. When the egoistic notion is completely destroyed, there is no taint in his intellect in the form: "May I get the fruit", i.e., there is no desire for the fruit. The egoistic notion is a mental state. Even though it is a mental state, this notion resides in the doer himself because he himself accepts the state of agency and non-agency. hatvāpi sa imāṅllokānna hanti na nibadhyate — Even if he kills all these living beings together, yet he does not kill, because there is no agency in him; and he is not bound, because there is no experiencing in him. The implication is: he has no connection either with actions or with fruits. In reality, Nature itself transforms into activity and fruit. But without the experience of this reality, the conscious soul becomes the doer and the enjoyer. Because when action occurs with egoism, then the doer, instrument, and action meet, and only then does the accumulation of action occur. But in one in whom the egoistic notion does not remain, only the illuminator of all, the support, the common consciousness remains, how can he kill anyone and how can he be bound by anything? Slaying and being bound are impossible for him (Gita 2.19). What is meant by killing all living beings? He in whom there is no egoistic notion and no taint in the intellect, in whatever caste and stage of life his body remains, when he engages in activities according to the situation that comes before him, he does not incur sin. For example, if a liberated Kshatriya automatically gets a situation of war, he, according to that situation, even after killing everyone, neither kills nor is bound. Because he is free from pride and selfishness. Here, Arjuna also has a context of war before him. Therefore, the Lord has inspired Arjuna for war by the words "hatvāpi". The word "api" implies: "even though engaged in action, he does nothing" (Gita 4.20). "Even though acting in all ways, that yogi abides in Me" (Gita 6.31). "Even though situated in the body, O son of Kunti, he neither acts nor is tainted" (Gita 13.31). The implication is that even during the performance of actions and when not engaged in actions, the non-conceptual nature of the Self remains as it is; i.e., by performing action or not performing action, there is no difference in the Self. Because the division of activity is in Nature, not in the Self. In reality, this ego (personality) alone is the cause of division in man. In the absence of ego, there is no cause of division with the Supreme Self. Then only the support of all, the illuminator, the common consciousness remains. He neither becomes the doer of activity nor the enjoyer of fruit. He was not the doer of activity and the enjoyer of fruit even before. Only by assuming relationship with the perishable body, that egoism has brought agency and experiencing in him. Ego is of two kinds: aham-sphurti (the flash of 'I') and aham-kriti (the notion of 'I'). Immediately on waking from deep sleep, a man first has the awareness of his mere existence; this is called aham-sphurti. After this, he superimposes on himself: "I am of such a name, caste, stage of life, etc."; this is the connection with the unreal. By connection with the unreal, i.e., by identifying with the body, the notion: "I perform the activity of the body" arises; this is called aham-kriti. Due to ego alone, limitation comes in oneself. Therefore, in aham-sphurti also, a slight limitation (personality) can remain. But this limitation is not binding; i.e., even when limitation is present, aham-sphurti is not defective. Because without aham-kriti, i.e., agency, the superimposition of virtue and defect does not occur in oneself. Only by the arrival of aham-kriti do virtue and defect get superimposed on oneself, by which auspicious and inauspicious actions are formed. On the rise of knowledge, the limitation present in aham-sphurti is burnt, and only the flash of existence remains. In such a state, a man neither kills nor is bound. What is meant by "neither kills nor is bound"? There is a non-conceptual state (nirvikalpa-avastha) and there is a non-conceptual realization (nirvikalpa-bodha). The non-conceptual state is accomplished by practice, and there is also a rise from it; i.e., it does not remain uniform. When there is detachment even from this non-conceptual state, the self-established non-conceptual realization is experienced. The non-conceptual realization is not accomplished by practice, and in that realization, the non-conceptual state is not disturbed in the least in any condition. In non-conceptual realization, there was never any change, there will never be, and change is not even possible. The implication is: there is never any agitation, etc., in that non-conceptual realization; this is the meaning of "neither kills nor is bound". What is the way to be free from the egoistic notion and taint in the intellect? Change in the form of activity occurs only in Nature, and those activities also have a beginning and an end, and the objects obtained as fruits of those actions also have union and separation. In this manner, union and separation continue with both activity and objects. Even when union and separation occur, one's Self remains as it is as the illuminator. When this is experienced through discrimination and reflection, there remains no egoistic notion and taint in the intellect. Connection — Knowledge and activity are not defective; rather, the pride of agency alone is defective because the accumulation of action occurs only due to the pride of agency. This is described in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
He who, through the contemplation of the agency of the Supreme Being, is free from the self-conceit, 'I alone do everything'; he whose understanding is not therefore tainted, and has come to be informed by the understanding; 'As I am not the agent of this work, its fruit is not connected with me; so this work does not belong to me' - such a person, though he slays all these men, not merely Bhisma, etc., does not slay them. Therefore, he is not bound by the actions known as battle. The meaning is that the fruits of such actions do not accrue to him.

Sri Krsna now teaches how action is induced. For this he differentiates actions generated by Sattva and the other Gunas. The object is to inculcate the desirability of the Sattvika type. For, only meditation on the self not being the agent, brings about the growth of Sattva.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Panca etc. upto na nibadhyate Conclusion :  the established end, because here a decision is arrived at.  Basis : the material object Destiny :  the good and  bad result  [of actions] previously accumulated.  These five viz., the basis etc., constitute the entire assembly of factors and hence they are the causes for each action.
 
But other [commentators give an etymology of]  adhisthana 'basis' to mean 'That by which all actions are governed'; and on that ground they believe that it denotes that action which exists in the intellect; which comes ot be due to the Rajas, and is being prone to transform itself into the pentad of (the mental dispositions viz.)  the content, the faith, the happiness, the desire to know and the aversion to know; which is referable by the term karma-yoga  (that which yokes man into activity); and which is described at times by the term prayatna 'effort'.
 
Agent :  the ascertainer characterised by the intellect.  Instrument :  [the personal instruments viz.] the mind, the eye etc., and also the external ones like sword etc.  Activity :  the activity of  upper life-breath, nether life-breath etc.  The effects of the righteous and unrighteous acts are indicated by the term Destiny.  All the dispositions located in the intellect are indicated by these two.  Still other commentators, however, take Basis to be the Absolute Lord.
 
Due to his  imperfect intellect :  because of his having indecisive  knowledge.  But he, who performs actions with the stability due to disappearance of th I-sense  (limited) and  [a stability] refined by hundreds of reasoning, as detailed earlier - he does not get the fetter, because he is a man of perfect intellect.  This is what is intended  [in the passage under study].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yasya, he who, the person whose intellect is refined by the instructions of the scriptures and the teachers, and reason; who has na, not; ahankrtah bhavah, the feeling of egoism, in whom does not occur the notion in the form, 'I am the agent'; i.e., he who sees thus: 'These five, viz locus etc. (14), imagined in the Self through ignorance, are verily the agents of all actions; not I. But I am the absolute, unchanging witness of their functions, 'Without vita force, without mind, pure, superior to the (other) superior immutable (Maya)" (Mu. 2.1.1)'; yasya, whose; buddhih, intellect, the internal organ, which is the limiting adunct of the Self; is na, not; lipyate, tainted, does not become regretful thinking, 'I have done this; as a result, I shall enter into hell'; whose intellect does not become thus tainted, he has a good intellect and he perceives (rightly). Api, even; hatva, by killing; iman, these; lokan, creatures, i.e. all living beings; sah he; does not hanti, kill-he does not perform the act of killing; nor does he nibadhyate, become bound, nor even does he become connected with its result, the fruit of an unrighteous action.
Objection: Even if this be a eulogy, is it not contradictory to say, 'even by killing he does not kill'?
Reply: This defect does not arise; for this becomes logical from the ordinary and the enlightened points of view. By adopting the empirical point of view (which consists in thinking), 'I am the slayer', by identifying the body with the Self, the Lord says, 'even by killing'; and, by taking His stand on the supreme Truth as explained above (the Lord says), 'he does not kill, nor does he become bound'. Thus both these surely become reasonable.
Objection; Is it not that the Self certainly does act in combination with the locus etc., which conclusion follows from the use of the word kevala (absolute) in the text, 'the absolute Self as the agent' (16)?
Reply: There is not such fault, because, the Self being changeless by nature, there is no possiblity of Its becoming united with the locus etc. For it is only a changeful entity that can possibly be united with another, or come to have agentship through combination. But, for the changeless Self there can be no combination with anything whatsoever. Hence, agentship through combination is not logical. Therefore, the absoluteness of the Self being natural, the word kevalam is merely a reiteration of an established fact.
And the changelessness of the Self is well known from the Upanisads, the Smrtis and logic. As to that, in the Gita itself this has been established more than once in such texts as, 'It is said that৷৷.This is unchangeable' (2.25), 'Actions are being done by the gunas themselves' (see 3.27), 'this ৷৷.supreme Self does not act৷৷.although existing in the body' (13.31), and in the Upanisads also in such texts as, 'It thinks, as it were, and shakes, as it were' (Br. 4.3.7).
And from the standpoint of reason also, the royal path is to hold that the true nature of the Self is that It is partless, independent of others and changeless. Even if mutability (of the Self) be accepted, It should have a change that is Its own. The functions of the locus etc. cannot be attributed to the agency of the Self. Indeed, an action done by someone else cannot be imputed to another by whom it has not been done! As for what is imputed (on somody) through ignorance, that is not his. As the ality of silver is not of nacre, or as surface or dirt attributed through ignorance to the sky by foolish people is not of the sky, similarly, the changes in the locus etc. also are verily their own, and not of the Self. Hence it has been well said that the enlightened person 'does not kill, nor is he bound', becuase of the absence of his being tainted by the idea that actions are done by himself. [Some translate this portion thus: '৷৷.because of the absence of the thought 'I am doing', and also due to the taintlessness of the mind'; or, '৷৷.in the absence of egotism and of all taint in the mind'.-Tr.]
After having declared, 'This One does not kill, nor is It killed' (2.19); having stated the immutability of the Self through such texts as, 'Never is this One born' (2.20) , etc., which adduce the reason for this; having briefly stated at the commencement of the Scripture-in, 'he who knows this One as indestructible' (2.21)-that the enlightened man has no eligibility for rites and duties; and having deliberated in various places on that (cessation) which has been mooted in the middle (of the Scripture), the Lord, by way of summarizing the purport of the Scripture, concludes here by saying that the enlightened person 'does not kill, nor does he become bound.' If this be so, then it becomes established that the three kinds of results of actions, viz the undesirable etc., do not accrue to the monks, since it is reasonable that, because of the illogicality of their entertaining the idea of being embodied, all actions resulting from ignorance become abandoned (by them). And hence, as a conseence of a reversal of this, it becomes inevitable that the results do accrue to others.
Thus, this is how the purport of the scripture Gita has been summed up. In order that this which is the essence of the teachings of all the Vedas should be. understood after deliberation by the learned ones possessing a sharp intellect, it has been explained by us in accordance with the scriptures and reasoning, in various places by dealing with it topically.
Thereafter, now is being stated what promts actions:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
If it is explained that the individual self is not included in the causes of action, then in the next sentence: "tatra evam sati", the word "kevalam" (alone) would be inappropriate. Because by the censure of one who regards the Self alone as the cause, it would appear that the Self has helpers as causes. To this he says: "kevalam...". The meaning is: the word "kevala" here does not mean "alone" (without helpers), but rather "actionless"; and its use is for the sake of establishing the censure. Why does the word "kevala" mean "actionless"? To this he says: "this...". It is declared in that very Ayasya-sruti.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
For this very wise man, He states freedom from sin even in war in: "yasya...". He whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense of "I", i.e., who has no disposition imagined by egoism, which is of the nature of a contrary perception in the body, senses, or vital airs. Whose intellect is not tainted, i.e., is not defiled by pleasure or pain which is the fruit of the action desired to be performed; he, even though slaying these worlds, i.e., living beings like Bhishma, etc., does not slay, i.e., does not incur the sin which is the fruit of slaying. Nor is he bound by that action, i.e., does not become a transmigrating soul. Objection: "Having committed slaying, how does he not slay?" To this doubt of contradiction it is said: "Since it is spoken of in both ways, from the perspective of the Self and from the perspective of the world, there is no contradiction." Here, that the wise man has indeed no activity was already well established from the sentence: "Though seated in the body, O son of Kunti, He neither acts nor is tainted" (Gita 13.31). This is established. Now, He describes the division of the prompters of action:

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Thus, having stated the bondage of the man of perverted view in all actions, to establish the possibility of the renunciation of all actions in the case of the man of right view who is opposite to that, and showing the non-tainting by actions by establishing his non-agency, He concludes what was proposed before that the threefold fruit of action does not accrue to sannyasis, in: "yasya...". He, the man of right view, whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense of "I", due to the absence of superimposition of identity with the two bodies created by ignorance; whose disposition is: "Actions are performed only by the five factors like the seat, etc., and not even a scent of activity exists in the absolute Self, which is the witness, immutable, and unattached"; due to possessing determined intellect, he has no feeling or notion of the form: "I am the doer"; therefore indeed, whose intellect is not tainted, i.e., due to the absence of the pride of agency, does not regret or get connected with pain in the form: "This action was done by me, and its fruit must be experienced only by me"; such a person who sees the changeless Self as distinct from the body, etc., even though slaying, i.e., causing destruction to all these worlds, i.e., living beings, from the worldly perspective, from the transcendental perspective does not slay, i.e., does not perform the act of slaying, nor is he bound by its fruit in the form of sin. For there are two views: the worldly view and the transcendental view. Therein, from the worldly view, one who is engaged in battle aiming at the slaying of Bhishma, etc., is said to slay; but from the transcendental view, since the absolute conscious Self has no activity and there is no slaying, He is said not to slay. And this is not mere praise, because it is established by logical reasoning. Here, by "he whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense of 'I'", the absence of agency is stated; and by "whose intellect is not tainted", the absence of experiencing is stated; therein, the cause for the absence of agency is the doctrine of the five causes stated before; and since the non-tainting by actions of the Self which is non-agent and non-enjoyer is established by logic, "he slays not, nor is bound" is reasonable. Thus He concludes what was established: "this itself...". The meaning of the Gita and the purpose of the scripture is briefly concluded here, which is of the form of the cessation of qualification for action in the case of the sannyasi who is established in knowledge. This meaning of Vedanta must be understood very carefully by seekers of liberation.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Thus, having described the bondage of one who looks upon the absolute Self as the doer, and showing the absence of bondage of the wise man who is opposite to that, He elaborates on what was stated before, in: "yasya...". He in whose case, when the activity of the seat, etc. occurs, there is no egoistic notion like: "I am the doer", whose intellect is not tainted, i.e., does not cling to: "May this fruit be mine"; he, even though slaying these worlds, i.e., Bhishma, etc., from the worldly perspective, does not slay, from the transcendental perspective indeed does not slay at all, nor is he bound by sin.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Objection: "How can there be the state of slayer for the actionless Self, and how can there be non-tainting for the wise man even after slaying?" To make this logical reasoning, which was established before also, firm for the disciple under the pretext of conclusion, He says: "yasya...". He whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense of "I", i.e., who, due to the absence of superimposition of identity with the body created by ignorance, when the activity of the five factors like the seat, etc. occurs, has no egoistic notion or feeling of the form: "I am the doer"; whose intellect is not tainted, i.e., due to the absence of the pride of agency, does not cling or get connected with pain in the form: "This was done by me, and its fruit must be experienced only by me"; he, even though slaying these worlds, i.e., Bhishma, etc., from the worldly perspective, from the transcendental perspective indeed does not slay at all, nor is he bound by sin. He states that both are reasonable by relying on the two views: "both..." etc. The absence of agency of the wise man has been elaborated through the impossibility of giving permission.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
"is not tainted" — by the fruit of action is the remainder. Objection: "But since the individual self is included in the five factors like the seat, etc., its being insentient like the body, etc., would result, and therefore, since the absence of agency, etc. is common to the insentient, the contemplation of non-agency of the Self would lead to making it equal to the insentient; and if it possesses knowledge, etc., the agency appropriate for that is unavoidable, and therefore, this would not be the meaning of 'looks upon the absolute Self as the doer'; and since 'slays not', etc., here would be contradicted, how is it reasonable?" To this he says: "by the Supreme Person...". "only by the growth of Sattva" — the meaning is that the growth of Sattva is here the cause of the grace of the Supreme Person. Qualification for ordained actions is for the sake of the rise of knowledge; but when knowledge has arisen, there is cessation of that qualification. With this scriptural limit in mind, he says: "conducive to knowledge...".

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
For this very wise man, He states freedom from sin even in war in: "yasya...". He whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense of "I", i.e., who has no disposition imagined by egoism, which is of the nature of a contrary perception in the body, senses, or vital airs. Whose intellect is not tainted, i.e., is not defiled by pleasure or pain which is the fruit of the action desired to be performed; he, even though slaying these worlds, i.e., living beings like Bhishma, etc., does not slay, i.e., does not incur the sin which is the fruit of slaying. Nor is he bound by that action, i.e., does not become a transmigrating soul. Objection: "Having committed slaying, how does he not slay?" To this doubt of contradiction it is said: "Since it is spoken of in both ways, from the perspective of the Self and from the perspective of the world, there is no contradiction." Here, that the wise man has indeed no activity was already well established from the sentence: "Though seated in the body, O son of Kunti, He neither acts nor is tainted" (Gita 13.31). This is established. Now, He describes the division of the prompters of action:

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Objection: "How can there be the state of slayer for the actionless Self, and how can there be non-tainting for the wise man even after slaying?" To make this logical reasoning, which was established before also, firm for the disciple under the pretext of conclusion, He says: "yasya...". He whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense of "I", i.e., who, due to the absence of superimposition of identity with the body created by ignorance, when the activity of the five factors like the seat, etc. occurs, has no egoistic notion or feeling of the form: "I am the doer"; whose intellect is not tainted, i.e., due to the absence of the pride of agency, does not cling or get connected with pain in the form: "This was done by me, and its fruit must be experienced only by me"; he, even though slaying these worlds, i.e., Bhishma, etc., from the worldly perspective, from the transcendental perspective indeed does not slay at all, nor is he bound by sin. He states that both are reasonable by relying on the two views: "both..." etc. The absence of agency of the wise man has been elaborated through the impossibility of giving permission.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled, though he kills men in this world, does not kill. Nor is he bound by his actions.

 In this verse the Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to fight arises from false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action, but he did not consider the supreme sanction within and without. If one does not know that a supersanction is there, why should he act? But one who knows the instruments of work, himself as the worker, and the Supreme Lord as the supreme sanctioner is perfect in doing everything. Such a person is never in illusion. Personal activity and responsibility arise from false ego and godlessness, or a lack of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Anyone who is acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even though killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever affected by the reaction of such killing. When a soldier kills under the command of a superior officer, he is not subject to be judged. But if a soldier kills on his own personal account, then he is certainly judged by a court of law.