Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yattu kṛtsnavadekasminkārye saktamahaitukam .
atattvārthavadalpaṃ ca tattāmasamudāhṛtam

Word Meanings:
यत् - which
तु - but
कृत्स्नवत् - as if it were
एकस्मिन् - one single
कार्ये - to effect
सक्तम् - attached
अहैतुकम् - without reason
अतत्त्वार्थवत् - without foundation in Truth
अल्पम् - trivial
च - and
तत् - that
तामसम् - Tamasic
उदाहृतम् - is declared.

Life Application:
Knowledge which clings to a single effect as if it were whole, without reason, base, narrow—is Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
And that knowledge by which one is attached to one single effect (the body) as if it were the whole, which is without reason, without foundation in Truth, and trivial, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
But that which clings to one single effect as if it were the whole, without reason, without foundation in Truth, and trivial  that is declared to be Tamasic.

यत् which? तु but? कृत्स्नवत् as if it were the whole? एकस्मिन् one single? कार्ये to effect? सक्तम् attached? अहैतुकम् without reason? अतत्त्वार्थवत् without foundation in Truth? अल्पम् trivial? च and? तत् that?,तामसम् Tamasic (dark)? उदाहृतम् is declared.Commentary The knowledge which regards that each and every object or being exists by itself and is perfect by itself? is Tamasic.One single effect Such as the body? thinking it to be the Self? or an idol? taking it for God? and thinking that there is nothing higher than that.The naked Jains consider that the soul which dwells in the body is of the same size as that of the body. Some regard that Isvara is a mere piece of stone or wood. Such knowledge is really not based on reason. It does not see things in their true light. It is narrow (Alpam) as it is not founded on reason. It produces very small results too. It extends over a limited area and is not allcomprehensive. This knowledge is said to be Tamasic? as it is found in Tamasic persons who are devoid of the power of discrimination.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
But that which clings blindly to one idea as if it were all, without logic, truth or insight, that has its origin in Darkness.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
A mind dominated by tamas clings to a single limited effect as if it were the entire truth, without ever inquiring into the cause. This knowledge of tamasic people is of the lowest grade. Such people are often fanatical and stubborn about their religion, devotion, lifestyle, and values. They never investigate the causes of worldly phenomena. Sri Shankaracharya states that their knowledge is irrational, not based on valid logic. Clinging to prejudices, they fail to see the world as it is and project their own imaginations. They see the world merely as an object of enjoyment, ignoring the supreme Lord. In summary: seeing non-duality is Sattvic; seeing differences is Rajasic; and taking the incomplete as complete is Tamasic.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
That  [instrument-of-knowledge], because of which, one, not realising the whole, gets indulged, without  reason, in a particular activity, and which is unconcerned with the real nature of things and is insignificant - that is declared to be of the Tamas (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
But that knowledge is declared to be Tamasika which clings to one single act as if it were the whole, which is not founded on reason, and which is untrue and insignificant.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
But that (knowledge) is said to be born of tamas which is confined to one form as though it were all, which is irrational, not concern with truth and triivial.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The knowledge which clings to a single effect (like the physical body) as if it were the entire Self, without any logical reasoning or scriptural truth, is Tamasic. It produces trivial results.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
But that knowledge which clings to one single effect, such as the physical body, as if it were the whole, without reason, without foundation in Truth, and which is trivial, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary: The Tamasic person identifies completely with the physical body. They think 'I am this body, I was a child, now I am old, I am rich, happy, etc.' This is due to delusion. They reject logical reasoning and scriptural proofs that show body and soul are different. Their understanding is trivial because it lacks discrimination. The Lord hesitates to call this 'knowledge' and refers to it using pronouns 'yat' and 'tat'.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
But that knowledge which clings to a 'single type of act' as what ought to be done, viz., act in the form of the worship of ghosts or evil spirits yielding very small fruits, as if it yielded all fruits; that work 'not founded on any reason for having attachment,' because it is not a source of all fruits; 'untrue' because it is based on a false view of things such as seeing differentiation in the nature of the Atman; 'insignificant', because the worship of ghosts and evil spirits yields poor results - for such reasons knowledge of this kind is declared to be Tamasika.

After having thus classified the threefold division of knowledge relating to work according to Gunas in respect of a person who is alified for work, Sri Krsna explains the triple division of the acts that ought to be done, according to Gunas.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sarvabhutesu etc. upto samudahrtam.  In the classified ones : i.e.,  [classified] as gods, human beings, etc.  Considers as [really] different :  i.e., with the thought  'Here on this depends my pleasure; here in that lies my displeasure'.  Without reason :  To take recourse to wrath, desire etc., slavishly under the influence of one's own addiction and also without examining the cause, in named as a thing born of the Tamas (Strand).

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
But tat, that knowledge; is udahrtam, said to be; tamasam, born of tamas; yat, which is; saktam, confined; ekasmin, to one; karye, from, to one body or to an external image etc., krtsnavat, as though it were all, as though it comprehended everything, thinking, 'The Self, or God, is only this much; there is nothing beyond it,'-as the naked Jainas hold that the soul conforms to and has the size of the body, or (as others hold) that God is merely a stone or wood-, remaining confined thus to one form; ahaitukam, which is irrational, bereft of logic; a-tattvarthavat, not concerned with truth-tattvartha, truth, means some-thing just as it is; that (knowledge) which has this (truth) as its object of comprehension is tattvarthavat; that without this is ; a-tattvarthavat-; and which, on account of the very fact of its being irrational, is alpam, trivial, because it is concerned with trifles or is productive of little result. This kind of knowledge is indeed found in non-discriminating creatures in whom tamas predominates.
Now is being stated the threehold division of action:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
That knowledge which clings to a single action of very small fruit (like the worship of ghosts) as if it were the whole, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The knowledge of the Charvakas, which identifies the body itself as the Self, or regards God as merely a stone or piece of wood, clinging to a single effect without reason or truth, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The knowledge which is attached to one form (like the body or an idol) as if it were the complete Reality, without logic, and devoid of the ultimate truth, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The materialist view that identifies the perishing physical body as the Self, without logical reasoning and devoid of Upanishadic truth, is Tamasic knowledge.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The knowledge which prompts one to worship ghosts or lower spirits for insignificant rewards, without logic and untrue in content, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The knowledge which is confined to a single manifested form of God, without experiencing the bliss of His complete divine pastimes, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Beholding the body or a stone idol as the complete Self/God, without logic or realization of truth, is Tamasic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in the mode of darkness.

 The “knowledge” of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or ignorance because every living entity in conditional life is born into the mode of ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the authorities or scriptural injunctions has knowledge that is limited to the body. He is not concerned about acting in terms of the directions of scripture. For him God is money, and knowledge means the satisfaction of bodily demands. Such knowledge has no connection with the Absolute Truth. It is more or less like the knowledge of the ordinary animals: the knowledge of eating, sleeping, defending and mating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the mode of darkness. In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyond this body is called knowledge in the mode of goodness, knowledge producing many theories and doctrines by dint of mundane logic and mental speculation is the product of the mode of passion, and knowledge concerned only with keeping the body comfortable is said to be in the mode of ignorance.