Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
vāyuryamo.agnirvaruṇaḥ śaśāṅkaḥ prajāpatistvaṃ prapitāmahaśca .
namo namaste.astu sahasrakṛtvaḥ punaśca bhūyo.api namo namaste

Word Meanings:
वायुः - Vayu
यमः - Yama
अग्निः - Agni
वरुणः - Varuna
शशाङ्कः - moon
प्रजापतिः - Prajapati
त्वम् - Thou
प्रपितामहः - greatgrandfather
च - and
नमःनमः - salutations
ते - to Thee
अस्तु - be
सहस्रकृत्वः - thousand times
पुनः - again
च - and
भूयः - again
अपि - also
नमःनमः - salutations
ते - to Thee.

Life Application:
Bow before the divine presence present in wind, fire, water, moon, creator, and great-grandfather of all.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
You are Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the Moon, Prajapati (Brahma), and the great-grandfather (the cause of Brahma also); a thousand salutations unto You, salutations! Again and again, salutations, salutations unto You!

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Thou art Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the moon, the Creator, and the great-grandfather. Salutations, salutations unto Thee, a thousand times, and again salutations, salutations unto Thee.

वायुः Vayu? यमः Yama? अग्निः Agni? वरुणः Varuna? शशाङ्कः moon? प्रजापतिः Prajapati? त्वम् Thou? प्रपितामहः greatgrandfather? च and? नमःनमः salutations? ते to Thee? अस्तु be? सहस्रकृत्वः thousand times? पुनः again? च and? भूयः again? अपि also ? नमःनमः salutations? ते to Thee.Commentary Prajapati Marichi and others were the seven mindborn sons of Brahma. Kasyapa descended from Marichi and from Kasyapa came all other progeny. Therefore? Marichi? Kasyapa and others are known as Prajapatis or the gods or progeny. The word Prajapati here is interpreted by some as Kasyapa and other Prajapatis. But as the word has been used here in the singular number it is appropriate to take Brahma as Prajapati. Brahma is the grandfather (Pitamaha) of Kasyapa. Brahma or the Hiranyagarbha is the Karya Brahman (effect). Isvara is the Karana Brahman (the cause for Brahma). Therefore? Isvara is the greatgrandfather. He is the father of,even Brahma.Isvara has Maya as the limiting adjunct. Maya is His causal body. Isvara has no plane. Maya is in an undifferentiated state. She is in a state where the alities of Nature (Gunas) are in eilibrium. When the eilibrium is disturbed through the will of Isvara? the three Gunas? Brahma? Vishnu and Siva manifest.Thou art the moon alludes to and includes the sun also.Punah? Bhuyah Again. Salutations a thousand times and again salutations. This indicates that Arjuna had intense faith in and boundless devotion for Lord Krishna. He was not satisfied even if he prostrated himself a thousand times.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Thou art the Wind, Thou art Death, Thou art the Fire, the Water, the Moon, the Father and the Grandfather. Honour and glory to Thee a thousand and a thousand times! Again and again, salutation be to Thee, O my Lord!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
So far Arjuna was singing praises of the supreme, imperishable, and attributeless (nirguna) form of Lord Krishna. A devotee might wonder about the exact relationship between this transcendent, attributeless Truth and his own personal deity (ishta devata). In ancient times, the presiding deities of natural forces were generally worshipped, prayed to, and meditated upon with faith. The Vedic seekers worshipped deities for purification and concentration of the mind, chief among them being Vayu (wind), Yama (death), Agni (fire), Varuna (lord of water), Shashanka (moon), and Prajapati (creator). These deities were invoked through hymns, worship, and sacrifices. Even the minds of the educated class of that era preferred these forms of God. Almost everywhere, people make the mistake of considering the means as the end (goal). However, here Arjuna, based on authentic knowledge, shows that in reality the infinite principle is the source of all deities. Yet, Arjuna sees that Infinite in the form of Lord Krishna. The philosophy of Vedanta is that the one Supreme Self, manifested through various limiting adjuncts, is obtained in the form of these deities. Even in the present times, devotees invoke the Supreme Lord as their personal deity and call their deity the God of gods (Devadhideva). It is to this Lord of gods that Arjuna bows down.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
You are Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the Moon, Prajapati and  the Great-paternal-grand-father; Salutation and salutation thousand times to You;  and again also more salutation and salutation to You.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
(a) You are Yayu, Yama, Agini, Varuna, Sasanka, Prajapati and the great-grandsire৷৷.

(b) ৷৷. Hail, Hail unto You, a thousand times! Hail unto You again and yet again!

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
You are Air, Death, Fire, the god of the waters, the moon, the Lord of the creatures, and the Greater-grandfather. Salutations! Salutation be to You a thousand times; salutation to You again and again! Salutation!

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Why it is appropriate (sthane) is explained by 'kasmad' etc. One who is complete (purna) and is the self (atma) is Mahatma. The word Atman is defined in Mahabharata: 'That which pervades, that which receives, that which experiences the objects here, and that which has continuous existence, is called Atman.' 'Tat param' means beyond existence (sat) and non-existence (asat). In Mahabharata: 'This universe is both sat and asat, and He is beyond both sat and asat.'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Another reason for His being all-pervading (sarvatmatva) is stated in 'kinca' etc. By 'Kasyapa and others', Virat, Daksha etc. are meant. Pitamaha is Brahma, and his father is Sutratma (Antaryamin), hence 'brahmano'pi' etc. is said. The result of saying 'You are all the deities' is stated as 'namah' etc. In 'sahasrakrtvah', the intended meaning of the suffix 'krtvasuc' is given as 'bahusah' (many times). The purpose of repetition is stated by 'punasca' etc. Due to the intensity of faith and devotion, there is no sense of satisfaction even after offering salutations; to show this lack of self-sufficiency/satiety in the mind, the repetition is made.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
You indeed are Vayu, Yama (the lord of death), Agni, Varuna, the Moon, Prajapati (like Daksha etc.), and the Great-grandfather (the father of even Brahma). Salutations to You a thousand times! Salutations! And again and again salutations to You! Salutations!

Commentary: Vayu — You are that Vayu from whom everyone gets life, all living beings live, and everyone gets strength. 'Yama' — You are that Yama who is the lord of Samyamanipuri and who rules over the entire universe. 'Agni' — You are that Agni which gives strength by pervading all, gives light by manifesting, and digests food in the form of Jatharagni. 'Varuna' — You are that Varuna, the lord of water, through whom everyone gets life. 'Sasanka' — You are that Moon by whom all herbs and vegetation are nourished. 'Prajapati' — You are Daksha and other Prajapatis who produce offspring. 'Prapitamaha' — You are the Great-grandfather as You manifest even grandfather Brahma. 'Namo namaste'stu sahasrakrtvah punasca bhuyo'pi namo namaste' — All the demigods like Indra etc. are indeed You. You are of infinite form. What praise shall I sing of You? What glory shall I sing? I can only offer salutations to You a thousand times; what else can I do?

The responsibility of doing anything remains with man only as long as he has the strength, i.e., egoism, of doing things in himself. When there is no capacity left to do anything in himself, then there is absolutely no responsibility left for doing. Now he only bows down, i.e., surrenders himself completely to the Lord. Then all the work of doing and causing to be done belongs only to the Lord (who is the refuge), and not to the surrendered soul.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
You alone are the great-grandsire of all and also grandfather etc. The Prajapatis are the fathers of all creatures. Hiranyagarbha (Brahma), the father of the Prajapatis, is the grandsire of all creatures. You, being the father of even Hiranyagarbha, are great grandfather of all creatures. You alone are denoted by the several terms by which these beings are known. Such is the meaning.

Beholding the Lord in a most marvellous form, Arjuna, bent with great awe, saluted Him from all sides with his eyes widely open from joy.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 11.39–11.40 jointly): Namo  namah etc.  Salutation and salutation :  This  repetition reveals the intensity of the devotion.  What has been taught by the past chapters by the Bhagavat regarding His own intrinsic nature,  Arjuna - witnessing the same by perception - declares it openly by way of devotional hymn.  Hence, to comment on the hymn would  symply amount to the repetition  [of what has already been said by us].  Hence, let me  (11.Ag.)  abstain [from commenting on it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
You are vayuh, Air; yamah, Death; and agnih, Fire; varunah, the god of the waters; sasankah, the moon; prajapatih, the Lord of the creatures- Kasyapa and others [See note on p.2.-Tr.]; and pra-pitamahah, the Great-grandfather, i.e. the Father ever of Brahma (Hiranyagarbha). Namo, salutations; namah, salutation; astu, be; te, to You; sahasra-krtvah, a thousand times. Punah ca bhuyah api namo te, salutation to You again and again; namah, salutation!
The suffix krtvasuc (after sahasra) indicates performance and repetition of the act of salutation a number of times. The words punah ca bhuyah api (again and again) indicate his own dissatisfaction [Dissatisfaction with only a few salutations.] owing to abundance of reverence and devotion.
So also,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Having himself said 'everyone offers salutations' [11.36] is appropriate, how does he ask a contradictory question 'why should they not salute' (kasmad ca te na nameran)? Pointing out that this is indeed an objection, and after resolving the doubt raised by it, he introduces: 'katham' etc. 'In this doubt' is to be supplied; this is the answer. To refute the narrow understanding of 'Mahatman' as merely one of non-small mind, he says: 'purnas ca' etc. To ward off the idea of 'Atman' as the individual soul (jiva), he says: 'atmeti', which is defined as: 'Since He pervades, since He receives, since He experiences the objects here, and since His existence is continuous, He is called Atman.' The universe being of the nature of sat (existence) and asat (non-existence) is You alone, and this is said because You bestow existence on them, and not otherwise; for if it were otherwise, it would contradict the subsequent statement. With this import, he quotes and explains with proof: 'tat param' etc.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Although being in all forms like Vayu, Yama, etc., the imperishability (avyayatva) of the one Supreme Lord is established, which is His Lordship (aisvarya) or dispassion (vairagya); therefore, he bows down fearfully saying 'sahasrakrtvo namo namah' (salutations a thousand times).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the Moon—this is also illustrative of the Sun and others. You are also Prajapati, i.e., Virat and Hiranyagarbha. And You are the Great-grandfather, being the father of even grandfather Hiranyagarbha. Since, being of the nature of all deities, You alone are worthy of salutations by all, therefore let there be salutations to You a thousand times from me, a humble soul! Again and yet again, salutations to You! The lack of a sense of satiety (alampratyaya) in offering salutations due to the abundance of devotion and faith is indicated by this repetition of salutations.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
And for this reason also, You alone are worthy of salutations by all, as You are of the nature of all deities—praising thus, he himself offers salutations: 'vayuh' etc. That You are in the form of Vayu etc. is said to illustrate all deities. Prajapati is the grandfather (Brahma), and because of being his creator, You are the Great-grandfather. Therefore, let there be salutations to You a thousand times. Even so, again and again salutations a thousand times—thus not finding satisfaction in saluting due to the excess weight of devotion and faith, he bows down many times.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Furthermore, You are Vayu etc., You are the Moon, Prajapati like Kasyapa etc., and the Father (great-grandfather) of even the grandfather who is Hiranyagarbha. And also, the scriptures declare: 'They call Him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, and He is the heavenly bird Garutman. Sages call the one existence by many names; they call it Agni, Yama, Matarisvan.' These and other mantras and Brahmana passages are authority. Since You are such a creator of the universe, the Lord of all, omniscient, all-pervading, the Self of all, and limitless, You are worthy of salutations by all; and even by offering limitless salutations, my satisfaction is not reached—with this intent, he says: 'namo namaste' etc.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Keeping in mind the import of Upanishadic declarations like 'They call Him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni...' and 'That itself is Agni, that is Vayu, that is Surya, that is Chandramas...', he explains the body-soul relationship (sariratma-bhava) indicated in 'this entire universe is pervaded by You' [11.38] as the cause for grammatical co-relationship (samanadhikaranya) with Vayu, Yama, Agni etc., by saying 'Therefore You alone' (atas tvam eveti). Since no specific relative is mentioned, the state of being the Great-grandfather applies to all, with this intent he says: 'You alone are the Great-grandfather of all'. The word 'ca' is for inclusion of grandfather etc., hence he says: 'and grandfather etc.' Since there is no other great-grandfather of all, the state of being the Great-grandfather is due to Him being their inner self; otherwise not, hence he says: 'The Prajapatis are the fathers of all creatures...' etc. Prajapatis are Daksha etc. The grandfather-hood included by the word 'ca' is also due to His being their inner self, hence he says: 'being the inner self of grandfather and others'. The cause of offering salutations in 'namo namaste'stu' etc., is the fear and joy born of experiencing His supremacy (paratva) and accessibility (saulabhya) manifested in the Cosmic Form, hence he says: 'beholding the most marvellous form' etc. To avoid misconception of the strength of the Infinite, he interprets 'ananta-virya' as 'of infinite prowess' (aparimita-parakrama). In 'You pervade everything' (sarvam samapnosi), to reject mere spatial pervasiveness like that of ether, the pervasiveness of control by entering within as stated in the scriptures is intended, hence he says: 'pervading everything as the inner self'. To support the co-relationship found in Upanishadic statements like 'All this is indeed Purusha', 'All this is indeed the Self', and 'All this is indeed Narayana', he says that the co-relationship of 'You are everything from all sides' is not for sublation, but for expressing qualified unity due to the body-soul relationship, hence he says 'Since You...' etc. The co-relationship of all words denoting sentient and non-sentient objects with words denoting the Lord in all Vedas and scriptures is based on the body-soul relationship; this is the final conclusion of this section, hence he says: 'You are the Imperishable, existence and non-existence' etc.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
'vayuh' etc. Vayu is the impeller of all and the life-breath of all; Yama is the controller of all; Agni is the support of all; Varuna is the lord of waters and the filler of all essences; Sasanka (the Moon) is the giver of joy to all; Prajapati is the creator of all. And also, You are the Great-grandfather (the father of even Brahma), therefore You are of all forms; why then should the aforementioned (deities) not bow to You? Therefore, because of Your being of all forms (due to being adhidaivika), You alone are worthy of salutations. So I too offer salutations—'sahasrakrtvah', i.e., let there be salutations to You a thousand times. By the word 'astu' it is indicated 'please accept'. Again, even after acceptance, 'punas ca' means 'once again, repeatedly I offer salutations to You', this is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Praising Him as the self of all deities—'vayuh' etc. Prajapati means Daksha and others, or the four-faced Brahma. Great-grandfather (Prapitamaha) is the father of the four-faced Brahma.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
You are air, and You are the supreme controller! You are fire, You are water, and You are the moon! You are Brahmā, the first living creature, and You are the great-grandfather. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You a thousand times, and again and yet again!

 The Lord is addressed here as air because the air is the most important representation of all the demigods, being all-pervasive. Arjuna also addresses Kṛṣṇa as the great-grandfather because He is the father of Brahmā, the first living creature in the universe.