Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥ .
yaḥ paśyati tathātmānamakartāraṃ sa paśyati

Word Meanings:
प्रकृत्या - by Nature
एव - alone
च - and
कर्माणि - actions
क्रियमाणानि - being performed
सर्वशः - all
यः - who
पश्यति - sees
तथा - so also
आत्मानम् - the Self
अकर्तारम् - actionless
सः - he
पश्यति - sees.

Life Application:
He sees truly who sees that all actions are performed by material nature alone, and that the Self is non-doer.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He who sees that all actions are performed in every way by Nature alone, and that the Self is actionless, he indeed sees.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He sees, who sees that all actions are performed by Nature alone and that the Self is actionless.

प्रकृत्या by Nature? एव alone? च and? कर्माणि actions? क्रियमाणानि being performed? सर्वशः all? यः who? पश्यति sees? तथा so also? आत्मानम् the Self? अकर्तारम् actionless? सः he? पश्यति sees.Commentary Nature is responsible for all activities. The Self is beyond all action. It is the silent witness only. He who experiences thus is the real seer or sage.He who knows that all actions proceeding from the five organs of knowledge? the five organs of action? the mind and the intellect are prompted by Nature and that the Self is actionless? really sees. He alone sees. He who identifies himself with the body? the mind and the senses and foolishly thinks that the Self is the actor is an ignorant man. He sees only with the physical eyes. He has no inner eye of intuition. The sky remains motionless but the clouds move across the sky. Even so the Self is actionless but Nature does everythin. The Self is destitute of any limiting adjunct. Just as there is no variety in ether? so also there is no variety in the Self. It is one homogeneous essence. It is free from any kind of characteristics. (Cf.III.27XIV.19XVIII.16)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
He who understands that it is only the Law of Nature that brings action to fruition, and that the Self never acts, alone knows the Truth.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The performance of each vehicle among the countless cars of different horsepower manufactured by various motor companies is distinct. From this, we cannot say that the petrol used in these cars is of different capacities. Bulbs are many, but electricity is one. These illustrations clearly explain the principle of the oneness of the Self expressed in this verse.

All actions are performed by the limitations (upadhis) born of Nature in the mere presence of the Self. Now, the difference in the actions of different individuals is due to their various good and bad tendencies (samskaras) and desires, not due to the Self. No action takes place in the Field (Kshetra) or the Knower of the Field (Kshetrajna) alone.

The Self is the non-doer. To perform actions, physical causes and desires in the mind are required; but the Self, being all-pervading, formless, and free from all limitations (upadhis), cannot have any action in It. How then can It be the doer? Other reasons regarding the non-doership of the Self will also be presented further.

He who knows the Self as the non-doer in the activities of Nature, indeed sees the Truth. In the absence of limitations, the distinction of qualities and actions of all living beings disappears, and only the Supreme Self remains established in Its own true nature.

Again, describing the right vision of the wise man in other words, the Lord says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Whosoever views all actions as being performed (or all objects as being created), indeed by the Material Cause itself and at the same time views his own Self as non-performer (or non-creator) - he veiws properly.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who sees that all acts are done universally by Prakrti alone and likewise that the self is not the doer, he sees indeed.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
And he who sees actions as being done in various ways by Nature itself, and also the Self as the non-agent,-he sees.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'And he who sees the Self as the non-doer, he sees (truly).'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
With regard to the contingency of Nature and its modifications being distinct from the Purusha (Spirit) as in the Sankhya system, the Lord replies: 'Again...'. He restates the direct realization born of the instruction: 'the Self alone...'. He sees the diversity of beings and modifications dissolved along with Nature into the Self alone; the meaning is that the diversity of beings cannot be dissolved into the pure Supreme Self if Nature is considered separate. Realizing that Nature and its modifications up to the specific entities derive their existence from the all-complete Self alone, he sees them as identical with That; hence the Lord says: 'from that alone' (tata eva). He clarifies this expansion with the support of the Sruti (Upanishads): 'From the Self...'. 'Attaining Brahman' means the manifestation as the whole (fullness), because everything that is the cause of incompleteness is assimilated into the Self; hence the Lord says: 'becomes Brahman'. By the word 'then' (tada), he indicates that liberation is coeval (simultaneous) with knowledge.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He who sees that all actions are performed in every way by Nature alone, and sees (realizes) himself as the non-doer, he indeed sees.

Commentary:

prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥ — In reality, the conscious principle (Spirit/Self) is naturally changeless, equanimous, and established in peace. Nature (Prakriti), the power of that conscious principle (God), is naturally active. Activity goes on in it eternally and continuously — 'prakarṣeṇa karaṇam' (Prakriti means that which acts intensely). Although Nature is said to have two states — active and inactive (active during creation and inactive during dissolution) — yet, if we reflect deeply, its activity does not cease even during dissolution. This is because when dissolution begins, Nature moves towards the state of creation. In this way, subtle activity continues in Nature. This subtle activity of Nature is called the inactive state because creation does not manifest in this state. But in the great creation (Maha-sarga), when the creation of the universe takes place, from the beginning to the middle of the creation, Nature moves towards creation, and on reaching the middle of creation, it moves towards dissolution. Thus, the gross activity of Nature is called the active state. If Nature is assumed to be completely inactive during dissolution and great dissolution, how will the beginning, middle, and end of dissolution/great dissolution occur? These three happen only because of the subtle activity in Nature. Therefore, compared to the state of creation, there is relative inactivity in the state of dissolution, not absolute inactivity.

The sun rises, then comes to the meridian, and then sets; from this it is known that on sunrise in the morning, light increases till noon, and from noon to sunset, light decreases. After sunset, darkness increases till midnight, and from midnight to sunrise, darkness decreases. In reality, the subtle junction of light and darkness is noon and midnight, but it is visible at the time of sunrise and sunset. From this perspective, the activity of light and darkness does not cease, but rather goes on continuously. Similarly, in creation and dissolution, great creation and great dissolution, activity continues in Nature constantly (Note p. 704).

When this Purusha (soul) associates itself with this active Nature, then the natural activities performed by the body appear to happen in oneself (due to identification).

yaḥ paśyati tathātmānamakartāraṃ sa paśyati — Whatever activities occur in Nature and its effects in the gross, subtle, and causal bodies, such as eating, drinking, walking, sitting, rising, growing, decaying, moving, sleeping, waking, thinking, being in samadhi, etc., are all performed by Nature alone, not by oneself, because no activity ever occurs in the Self — he who sees, i.e., experiences this, indeed sees correctly. This is because by seeing thus, one experiences one's own non-doership.

Here, actions are described as being performed by Nature; at other places, they are described as being performed by the qualities (gunas), and elsewhere, by the senses. These three explanations are identical. Nature is the cause of all, qualities are the effects of Nature, and the senses are the effects of the qualities. Therefore, all actions performed by Nature, qualities, and senses are said to be performed by Nature alone.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
When he perceives that 'all acts are performed by the Prakrti' in the manner previously stated in, 'Prakrti is said to be the cause of agency to the body and sense-organs' (13.20), and perceive also that 'the self, being of the form of knowledge, is not the doer,' and that the self's conjunction with the Prakrti, Its direction of the body and Its experiences of happiness and misery are the result of ignorance of the nature of Karma - then indeed he perceives the pure self.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Prakrtya etc.  He whose firm conviction is of this nature 'The Material Cause alone performs  (or creates) this; I do nothing' - he, though he performs  (or creates) all, does not  perform  (or create) anything  [in fact]. In this manner, is the absence of doership in him.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And yah, he who; pasyati, sees, realizes; karmani, actions, those performed through speech, mind and body; as kriyamanani, being done, being accomplished; sarvasah, in various ways; prakrtya, by Nature-Nature is God's Maya consisting of the three alities, as is said in the Upanisadic text, 'However, know Maya as Nature' (Sv. 4.10); by that Nature; eva, itself-not by the other [Not by the Pradhana of the Sankhyas, known otherwise as prakrti.] which transforms itself in the form of cause and effects such as Mahat etc.; tatha, and also; atmanam, the Self, the Knower of the field; as akartaram, the non-agent, devoid of all adjuncts; sah, he; pasyati, sees-he is the one who has realized the supreme Reality. This is the idea. What is implied is that there is no valid proof about differences in the Non-agent who is devoid of alities and is unconditioned like space.
The Lord elaborates again in other words that very true knowledge:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Regarding the words 'prakṛtyaiva ca', someone might explain the connection as: 'he who sees all actions performed by Nature itself, sees the Self as the non-doer'. But that is incorrect, because it would make the word 'tathā' redundant. With this in mind, the commentator offers another connection: 'and the Self...'. 'He sees' means he sees the Supreme Lord.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Lord states the result of seeing the second also as one's own self in the words 'prakṛtyaiva'. In the Sankhya system, actions are performed by Nature itself, and doership, being of the nature of activity, resides in Nature, and not in the pure Self. Even though the individual soul (jiva) is of atomic size and of the nature of consciousness, its doership is only due to the continuity of its nature as a part of the Supreme Lord (Purushottama), who is the primary doer. However, when the specificity of the adjuncts (upadhis) of the two bodies (gross and subtle) is present, the doership there is indeed material (belonging to Nature). This should be kept in mind. Thus, he who ultimately sees the Self, his own true nature, as the non-doer and free from all limitations—he indeed sees; others are blind.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Objection: Since the performers of good and evil deeds are different selves in each body and are diverse owing to their experiencing various fruits, how is it said: 'seeing the one Self situated equally in all beings, he does not destroy the Self by the self'?
To this, the Lord says: 'prakṛtyaiva'.
The discriminating person sees that all actions initiated by speech, mind, and body are performed in all ways and in all manners only by Nature—the divine Maya consisting of the three qualities, which transforms into the aggregate of body and senses and is the cause and effect of all modifications—and not by the Purusha (Spirit), which is free from all modifications. In the same way, while actions are being performed by the Field, he who sees the Self, the Knower of the Field, as the non-doer, free from all limitations (upadhis), unattached, one, and equal everywhere—the word 'tathā' (and also) is used to attract the verb 'pasyati' (sees)—'he sees', i.e., he is the seer of the supreme Truth, as explained earlier. Even though the modified Field is different and diverse in each body due to being the performer of various actions, there is no proof of any division in the actionless Self which is free from all distinctions, like space, as has been established earlier.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Objection: If inequality is observed owing to the agency of good and evil deeds, how can there be equality of the Self?
Anticipating this, the Lord says: 'prakṛtyaiva'.
He who sees that all actions are performed in every way only by Nature, which has transformed into the form of the body and senses, and likewise sees the Self as the non-doer, realizing that the doership of the Self is only due to identification with the body and not inherent in itself—he alone sees rightly, and no one else. This is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Objection: If it is argued that owing to the distinctions in each body due to happiness and misery, the attributes called dharma and adharma, and one's own actions, the vision of equality in those entities is untenable, the Lord replies to that. 
Prakriti is the divine Maya consisting of the three qualities. According to the Sruti, 'However, know Maya as Nature' (Sv. Upanishad). By that Nature alone, all actions initiated by speech, mind, and body are being performed in all ways, i.e., in various modes. The various modes refer to the abundance of types such as desire-motivated (kamya) and prohibited (nishiddha) actions. He who sees this, and likewise sees the Self, the Knower of the Field, as the non-doer, free from all limitations (upadhis), and one—he sees, i.e., he is the Knower of the Supreme Truth, as explained before. The meaning is that there is no valid proof about differences in the Non-agent who is devoid of attributes and is unconditioned like space.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Now, the distinction consisting in being the direct locus of action and the absence of it is stated in the two verses starting with 'prakṛtyaiva'. Here, 'actions' refer to contraction, expansion, etc. The mere observation of the nature of actions as being performed by Nature is common to both the wise and the ignorant. But for the wise, the perception of actions as being performed by Nature is distinct. To clarify this acceptable aspect, the word 'kriyamānāni' (being performed) is used. The commentator establishes the non-doership of the Self in its pure state, denoted by the word 'Atman', as 'being of the form of knowledge' (or 'being of the form of the knower', according to another reading). If so, how can it be subject to scriptural injunctions and be the enjoyer of their fruits, etc.? To this, the commentator replies: 'tasya...' (of it). The idea is that there is no defect here because all of this is due to the stream of adjuncts (upadhis) rotating like a wheel.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Objection: If He alone exists everywhere in all forms, then why does everyone not see so?
Anticipating this, the Lord says: 'prakṛtyaiva'.
He who sees the actions performed by Nature as those meant for the divine play (līlā)—and by the word 'ca' (and) also those caused to be performed—and likewise sees the Self (the individual soul, jīva) as the non-doer (incapable of doing anything in the absence of His will), he sees the Supreme Lord. This is the remaining part of the sentence. Or, he alone sees; others are indeed blind. This is the idea.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Objection: Who can see beings of diverse natures with an equal mind, just as one might view fire with a cool attitude?
Anticipating this, the Lord says: 'prakṛtyaiva'.
He who sees all actions initiated by speech, mind, and body as being performed in every way only by Nature, and likewise sees the Self as the non-doer—he alone sees equality everywhere in the manner stated earlier. This connects with the previous verse.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing, actually sees.

 This body is made by material nature under the direction of the Supersoul, and whatever activities are going on in respect to one’s body are not his doing. Whatever one is supposed to do, either for happiness or for distress, one is forced to do because of the bodily constitution. The self, however, is outside all these bodily activities. This body is given according to one’s past desires. To fulfill desires, one is given the body, with which he acts accordingly. Practically speaking, the body is a machine, designed by the Supreme Lord, to fulfill desires. Because of desires, one is put into difficult circumstances to suffer or to enjoy. This transcendental vision of the living entity, when developed, makes one separate from bodily activities. One who has such a vision is an actual seer.