Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yataḥ pravṛttirbhūtānāṃ yena sarvamidaṃ tatam .
svakarmaṇā tamabhyarcya siddhiṃ vindati mānavaḥ

Word Meanings:
यतः - from whom
प्रवृत्तिः - the evolution
भूतानाम् - of beings
येन - by whom
सर्वम् - all
इदम् - this
ततम् - is pervaded
स्वकर्मणा - with his own duty
तम् - Him
अभ्यर्च्य - worshipping
सिद्धिम् - perfection
विन्दति - attains
मानवः - man.

Life Application:
Worshipping Him from whom all beings emerge and by whom all is pervaded through own duty, man wins perfection.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He from Whom all beings arise, and by Whom all this world is pervaded — by worshipping Him through his own duty, man attains perfection.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He from Whom all the beings have evolved and by Whom all this is pervaded  worshipping Him with his own duty, man attains perfection.

यतः from whom? प्रवृत्तिः (is) the evolution? भूतानाम् of beings? येन by whom? सर्वम् all? इदम् this? ततम् is pervaded? स्वकर्मणा with his own duty? तम् Him? अभ्यर्च्य worshipping? सिद्धिम् perfection? विन्दति attains? मानवः man.Commentary The performance by a man of his own duty is simply carrying into effect the intention of the Supreme from Whom the whole of the creation emanates. When a man worships Him? the Supreme Being? with the flowers of his action? then He is immensely pleased and being thus gratified by such worship He confers on Him? as a boon? dispassion and discrimination.Pravritti Evolution or activity it proceeds from the Lord? the Antaryamin? the Inner Ruler.Bhutanam Beings living creatures.Svakarmana With his own duty each according to his caste as described above.Man attains perfection by worshipping the Lord by performing his own duty? i.e.? he becomes alified for the dawn of Selfknowledge (for Jnana Yoga).

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Man reaches perfection by dedicating his actions to God, Who is the source of all being, and fills everything.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
When a person performs actions in accordance with their nature (Varna) and station in life (Ashrama) as an offering to the Lord, past Vasanas (desires) are exhausted and the mind is purified. Our daily duties are themselves the worship of the Lord from Whom we receive our faculties and power. By worshipping the all-pervading Ruler through Svadharma, the ego dissolves, and this leads to the highest spiritual achievement (Siddhi).

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
That, whence the activities of the beings arise; by which this universe is pervaded-worshipping That by one's own prescribed action, a man attains success.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He from whome arise the activity of all beings and by whom all this is pervaded - by worshipping Him with his own duty man reaches perfection.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
A human being achieves success by adoring through his own duties Him from whom is the origin of creatures, and by whom is all this pervaded.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The Inner Ruler (Antaryamin) is the source of both the birth and the activities of all beings. By dedicating one's prescribed duties to Him as a form of worship, the seeker gains purification of the mind and becomes qualified for steadfastness in Self-knowledge.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He from Whom all beings originate and by Whom this entire universe is pervaded — by worshipping Him through his own duty, man attains perfection.

Commentary: Svadharma (one's natural duty) is a direct form of worshipping the Supreme Lord. Whether it is teaching, guarding, farming, or serving, when performed without self-interest and offered as a flower of devotion, it purifies the heart and frees the soul from material bondage. This path of action is open to all human beings, irrespective of caste, creed, or race.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
He from whom arise all activities as origination of all beings and by whom all this is pervaded, by worshipping Him, i.e., Myself, who abide in Indra and other divinites as the Inner Ruler, man attains perfection, consisting in the attainment of Myself by My grace. It has been told before that everything originates from Me and all this is pervaded by Me, in texts like the following:  'I am the origin and dissolution of the whole universe' (7.6), 'There is nothing higher than Myself, O Arjuna' (7.7), 'This entire universe is pervaded by Me in an unmanifest form' (9.4), 'Under My supervision, the Prakrti gives birth to all mobile and immobile entities' (9.10) and 'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8).

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Manavah, a human being; vindati, achieves; siddhim, success, merely in the form of the ability for steadfastness in Knowledge; abhyarcya, by adoring, worshipping; svakarmana, with his own duties stated above, as allotted to each caste; tam, Him, God; yatah, from whom, from which God; comes pravrttih, origin,-or, from which internal Ruler comes the activities; ;bhutanam, of creatures, of living beings; and yena, by whom, by which God; is tatam, pervaded; sarvam, all; idam, this world.
Since this is so, therefore,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
By worshipping Him, the Supreme Lord from Whom the ancient activity of all beings spreads and by Whom this universe is pervaded, with one's own duty, man attains perfection.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Worshipping the Lord, Who is the material and efficient cause of the universe, Who is the Inner Ruler and Who pervades all existence, through one's own scriptural duty, a human being gains purification of the mind, which is the qualification for Self-knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Worshipping Him, the Supreme Lord from Whom the activities of all creatures proceed and by Whom this universe is pervaded, with one's own duty, man attains perfection.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Worshipping the Supreme Lord, the Creator and Inner Controller of all beings, Who pervades this entire universe, with one's own duties, man attains the qualification for Self-knowledge.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
By worshipping Him, the Supreme Lord Who is the source of all evolution and Who pervades and controls this universe, with one's own duties performed in full dedication, man attains the grace of the Lord and ultimate liberation.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
By worshipping the Supreme Lord, from Whom is the origin of all beings and by Whom this universe is pervaded, with one's own prescribed actions performed with devotion, man attains perfection.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
By worshipping Him, the Inner Ruler from Whom the physical, mental, and vocal activities of all beings proceed, and Who pervades all existence, through the dedication of one's duties, man attains liberation.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-pervading, a man can attain perfection through performing his own work.

 As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all living beings are fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. Thus the Supreme Lord is the beginning of all living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedānta-sūtra – janmādy asya yataḥ. The Supreme Lord is therefore the beginning of life of every living entity. And as stated in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā , the Supreme Lord, by His two energies, His external energy and internal energy, is all-pervading. Therefore one should worship the Supreme Lord with His energies. Generally the Vaiṣṇava devotees worship the Supreme Lord with His internal energy. His external energy is a perverted reflection of the internal energy. The external energy is a background, but the Supreme Lord by the expansion of His plenary portion as Paramātmā is situated everywhere. He is the Supersoul of all demigods, all human beings, all animals, everywhere. One should therefore know that as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord one has his duty to render service unto the Supreme. Everyone should be engaged in devotional service to the Lord in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is recommended in this verse. Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type of occupation by Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses. And by the result of the work in which one is engaged, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, should be worshiped. If one thinks always in this way, in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then, by the grace of the Lord, he becomes fully aware of everything. That is the perfection of life. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (12.7), teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā. The Supreme Lord Himself takes charge of delivering such a devotee. That is the highest perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may be engaged, if he serves the Supreme Lord he will achieve the highest perfection.