Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yāmimāṃ puṣpitāṃ vācaṃ pravadantyavipaścitaḥ .
vedavādaratāḥ pārtha nānyadastīti vādinaḥ

Word Meanings:
याम - which
इमाम् - this
पुष्पिताम् - flowery
वाचम् - speech
प्रवदन्ति - utter
अविपश्चितः - the unwise
वेदवादरताः - delighting in Vedic controversies
पार्थ - O Partha
न - not
अन्यत् - other
अस्ति - is
इति - thus
वादिनः - saying.

Life Application:
Look beyond superficial promises of quick rewards or showy displays, seeking genuine substance in your pursuits.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Partha, unwise men who delight in disputations over the Vedas speak this flowery (showy, ornate) speech, saying that there is nothing greater than this (heaven).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Flowery speech is uttered by the unwise, taking pleasure in the eulogising words of the Vedas, O Arjuna, saying, "There is nothing else."

याम which? इमाम् this? पुष्पिताम् flowery? वाचम् speech? प्रवदन्ति utter? अविपश्चितः the unwise? वेदवादरताः takign pleasure in the eulogising words of the Vedas? पार्थ O Partha? न not? अन्यत् other? अस्ति is? इति thus? वादिनः saying.Commentary Unwise people who are lacking in discrimination lay great stress upon the Karma Kanda or the ritualistic portion of the Vedas? which lays down specific rules for specific actions for,the attainment of specific fruits and ectol these actions and rewards unduly. They are highly enamoured of such Vedic passages which prescribe ways for the attainment of heavenly enjoyments. They say that there is nothing else beyond the sensual enjoyments in Svarga (heaven) which can be obtained by performing the rites of the Karma Kanda of the Vedas.There are two main divisions of the Vedas -- Karma Kanda (the section dealing with action) and Jnana Kanda (the section dealing with knowledge). The Karma Kanda comprises the Brahmanas and the Samhitas. This is the authority for the Purvamimamsa school founded by Jaimini. The followers of this school deal with rituals and prescribe many of them for attaining enjoyments and power here and happiness in heaven. They regard this as the ultimate object of human existence. Ordinary people are attracted by their panegyrics. The Jnana Kanda comprises the Aranyakas and the Upanishads which deal with the nature of Brahman or the Supreme Self.Life in heaven is also transitory. After the fruits of the good actions are exhausted? one has to come back to this earthplane. Liberatio or Moksha can only be attained by knowledge of the Self but not by performing a thousand and one sacrifices.Lord Krishna assigns a comparatively inferior position to the doctrine of the Mimamsakas of performing Vedic sacrifices for obtaining heaven? power and lordship in this world as they cannot give us final liberation.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Only the ignorant speak in figurative language. It is they who extol the letter of the scriptures, saying, There is nothing deeper than this.'

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
No commentary.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O son of  Prtha !  Those, whose very nature is desire,  whose goal is heaven,  who esteem only the Vedic declaration [of fruits],  who declare that there is nothing else,  who proclaim this flowery speech about the paths to the lordship of the objects of enjoyment-[the paths]  that are full of different actionsand who desire action alone as a fruit of their birth-they are men without insight.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
O! Partha, the unwise, who rejoice in the letter of the Vedas, say, 'There is nothing else.' They are full only of wordly desires and they hanker for heaven. They speak flowery words which offer rirth as the fruit of work. They look upon the Vedas as consisting entirely of varied rites for the attainment of pleasure and power. Those who cling so to pleasure and power are attracted by that speech (offering heavenly rewards) and are unable to develop the resolute will of a concentrated mind.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O son of Prtha, those undiscerning people who utter this flowery talk  which promises birth as a result of rites and duties, and is full of various special rites meant for the attainment of enjoyment and affluence , they remain engrossed in the utterances of the Vedas and declare that nothing else exists; their minds are full of desires and they have heaven as the goal.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The unwise, delighting in the flowery words of the Vedas that speak only of ritual reward, declare, O Partha, that there is nothing beyond such enjoyment.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Those lacking discrimination take pleasure in the ornate, ritual-praising speech of the Vedas and insist, O Partha, that nothing exists beyond it.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O son of Pritha, those undiscriminating men who are absorbed in desires, who regard heaven as the highest goal, who delight in the ritualistic, desire-prompted actions enjoined in the Vedas, and who declare that there is nothing beyond sense-enjoyments, utter this kind of flowery (showy, ornamental) speech -- speech which promises rebirth as the fruit of action and which describes numerous rites for the attainment of enjoyment and prosperity.

Explanation -- 'Kamatmanah' -- They are so thoroughly steeped in desires that they themselves become identified with desire; they see no difference between themselves and their desires. Their conviction is that a man cannot live without desire, that no action is possible without desire, and that without desire a man becomes as inert as a stone, devoid even of consciousness. Men of such a disposition are called 'kamatmanah' (those whose very self is desire).
The Self itself remains ever the same, eternal and changeless, never increasing or decreasing; but desire keeps coming and going, waxing and waning. The Self is a portion of the Supreme, whereas desire belongs to the portion that is the world. Hence the Self and desire are utterly distinct from one another. But those who are engrossed in desire never perceive this distinction of their own true nature.
'Svargaparah' -- Since heaven yields the finest of celestial enjoyments, such men regard heaven alone as the supreme goal and remain occupied day and night solely in striving to attain it.
Here the word 'svargaparah' refers to those who place their faith in the heavenly worlds described in the Vedas and the scriptures.
'Vedavadaratah partha nanyadastiti vadinah' -- They delight in the desire-prompted actions enjoined in the Vedas; that is, they hold that the entire purport of the Vedas is confined to enjoyment and the attainment of heaven, and so they are called 'vedavadaratah' (delighting in the disputations of the Vedas). In their view there is nothing besides the enjoyments of this world and of heaven -- that is to say, in their eyes there exists no such thing as the Supreme, true knowledge, liberation, or love of God apart from enjoyment. Hence they remain wholly absorbed in enjoyment, the pursuit of which becomes their chief aim.
'Yamimam pushpitam vacham pravadantyavipashcitah' -- Undiscriminating men, who lack the discernment to distinguish the real from the unreal, the eternal from the transient, the imperishable from the perishable, utter this flowery speech of the Vedas, which describes only the world and its enjoyments.
The word 'pushpitam' (flowery) implies that speech which merely describes the attainment of enjoyment and prosperity is like a flower or a leaf -- not the fruit. Satisfaction comes only from the fruit, not from the beauty of flower and leaf. Such speech does not yield a lasting result; its result -- the enjoyment of heaven and the like -- is pleasing only to look at and has no permanence.
'Janmakarmaphalapradam' -- That flowery speech leads to rebirth as the fruit of action, because it gives importance solely to worldly enjoyments; and attachment to such enjoyments is itself the cause of further birth (Gita 13.21).
'Kriyavisheshabahulam bhogaishvaryagatim prati' -- That flowery, that is, showy and ornamental speech, in describing the desire-prompted rites for the attainment of enjoyment and prosperity, abounds in a multiplicity of actions; that is, such rites involve numerous procedures, numerous actions to be performed, numerous materials to be procured, and a great deal of bodily labour as well (Gita 18.24).

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The ignorant, whose knowledge is little, and who have as their sole aim the attainment of enjoyment and power, speak the flowery language i.e., having its flowers (show) only as fruits, which look apparently beautiful at first sight. They rejoice in the letter of the Vedas i.e., they are attached to heaven and such other results (promised in the Karma-kanda of the Vedas). They say that there is nothing else, owing to their intense attachment to these results. They say that there is no fruit superior to heaven etc. They are full of worldly desires and their minds are highly attached to secular desires. They hanker for heaven, i.e. think of the enjoyment of the felicities of heaven, after which one can again have rirth which offers again the opportunity to perform varied rites devoid of true knowledge and leads towards the attainment of enjoyments and power once again.

With regard to those who cling to pleasure and power and whose understanding is contaminated by that flowery speech relating to pleasure and lordly powers, the aforesaid mental disposition characterised by resolution, will not arise in their Samadhi. Samadhi here means the mind. The knowledge of the self will not arise in such minds. In the minds of these persons, there cannot arise the mental disposition that looks on all Vedic rituals as means for liberation based on the determined conviction about the real form of the self. Hence, in an aspirant for liberation, there should be no attachment to rituals out of the conviction that they are meant for the acisition of objects of desire only.

It may be estioned why the Vedas, which have more of love for Jivas than thousands of parents, and which are endeavouring to save the Jivas, should prescribe in this way rites whose fruits are infinitesimal and which produce only new births. It can also be asked if it is proper to abandon what is given in the Vedas. Sri Krsna replies to these estions.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 2.42–2.44 jointly): Yam imam etc., upto na vidhiyate.  Those, who crave for objects of desire, speak, on their own  accord, of  this flowery Vedic speech which is pervaded by the fruits i.e., the heaven in the future; and who, hence, desire the action itself as the fruit of their birth - these are men without insight.  further, having their mind carried away by the same Vedic sentence imagined by themselves, these persons, eventhough they are endowed with the determinate knowledge, are not fit for concentration, because they do not decide this (concentration) as a fruit [of their action].  This is the purport of the traid of these verses.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Partha, O son of Prtha; those devoid of one-pointed conviction, who pravadanti, utter; imam, this; yam puspitam vacam, flowery talk, which is going to be stated, which is beautiful like a tree in bloom, pleasant to hear, and appears to be (meaningful) sentences [Sentences that can be called really meaningful are only those that reveal the self.-Tr.];  who are they? they are  avipascitah, people who are undiscerning, of poor intellect, i.e. non-discriminating; veda-vada-ratah, who remain engrossed in the utterances of the Vedas, in the Vedic sentences which reveal many panegyrics, fruits of action and their means; and vadinah, who declare, are apt tosay; iti, that; na anyat, nothing else [God, Liberation, etc.]; asti, exists, apart from the rites and duties conducive to such results as attainment of heaven etc.
And they are kamatmanah, have their minds full of desires, i.e. they are swayed by desires, they are, by nature, full of desires; (and) svarga-parah, have heaven as the goal. Those who accept heaven (svarga) as the supreme (para) human goal, to whom heaven is the highest, are svarga-parah. They utter that speech ( this is supplied to construct the sentence ) which janma-karma-phala-pradam, promises birth as a result of rites and duties. The result (phala) of rites and duties (karma) is karma-phala. Birth (janma) itself is the karma-phala. That (speech) which promises this is janma-karma-phala-prada. (This speech) is kriya-visesa-bahulam, full of various special rites; bhoga-aisvarya-gatim-prati, for the attainment of enjoyment and affluence. Special (visesa) rites (kriya) are kriya-visesah. The speech that is full (bahula) of these, the speech by which that is full (bahula) of these, the speech by which these, viz objects such as heaven, animals and sons, are revealed plentifully, is kriya-visesa-bahula. Bhoga, enjoyment, and aisvarya, affluence, are bhoga-aisvarya. Their attainment (gatih) is bhoga-aisvarya-gatih. (They utter a speech) that is full of the specialized rites, prati, meant for that (attainment). The fools who utter that speech move in the cycle of transmigration. This is the idea.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
O Partha, the unwise, engrossed in the eulogising words of the Vedas concerning ritual, proclaim that there is nothing other than this.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The undiscerning, devoted to the flowery, ritual-extolling utterances of the Vedas, declare, O Partha, that nothing exists beyond them.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
O Partha, unwise men, delighting in the flowery speech of the Vedas that dwells on ritual, maintain that there is nothing besides this.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Those without discrimination, taking pleasure in the ornate ritual-praising words of the Vedas, say, O Partha, that there is nothing else.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
O Partha, the unwise, attached to the flowery words of the Vedas extolling rites, declare that there is nothing beyond these.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The undiscriminating, delighting in the eulogising, ritual-bound speech of the Vedas, proclaim, O Partha, that nothing exists apart from it.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
O Partha, unwise men who delight in the flowery, ritual-extolling speech of the Vedas hold that there is nothing else beyond it.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Those devoid of discrimination, taking pleasure in the ornate ritual-praising words of the Vedas, declare, O Partha, that there is nothing else.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth.

 People in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance they are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in the karma-kāṇḍa portions of the Vedas. They do not want anything more than sense gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wine and women are available and material opulence is very common. In the Vedas many sacrifices are recommended for elevation to the heavenly planets, especially the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifices. In fact, it is stated that anyone desiring elevation to heavenly planets must perform these sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of knowledge think that this is the whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very difficult for such inexperienced persons to be situated in the determined action of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous trees without knowing the results of such attractions, unenlightened men are similarly attracted by such heavenly opulence and the sense enjoyment thereof. In the karma-kāṇḍa section of the Vedas it is said, apāma somam amṛtā abhūma and akṣayyaṁ ha vai cāturmāsya-yājinaḥ sukṛtaṁ bhavati. In other words, those who perform the four-month penances become eligible to drink the soma-rasa beverages to become immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth some are very eager to have soma-rasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sense gratifications. Such persons have no faith in liberation from material bondage, and they are very much attached to the pompous ceremonies of Vedic sacrifices. They are generally sensual, and they do not want anything other than the heavenly pleasures of life. It is understood that there are gardens called Nandana-kānana in which there is good opportunity for association with angelic, beautiful women and having a profuse supply of soma-rasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainly sensual; therefore there are those who are purely attached to such material, temporary happiness, as lords of the material world.