Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
kāmamāśritya duṣpūraṃ dambhamānamadānvitāḥ .
mohādgṛhītvāsadgrāhānpravartante.aśucivratāḥ

Word Meanings:
कामम् - desire
आश्रित्य - abiding in
दुष्पूरम् - insatiable
दम्भमानमदान्विताः - full of hypocrisy
मोहात् - through delusion
गृहीत्वा - having held
असद्ग्राहान् - evil ideas
प्रवर्तन्ते - they work
अशुचिव्रताः - with impure resolves.

Life Application:
Surrendering to insatiable desire, full of hypocrisy, pride, arrogance, holding false views through delusion, acting with impure vows.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Filled with insatiable desires, full of hypocrisy, pride, and arrogance, holding evil ideas through delusion, they work with impure resolves.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Filled with insatiable desires, full of hypocrisy, pride and arrogance, holding evil ideas through delusion, they work with impure resolves.

कामम् desire? आश्रित्य abiding in? दुष्पूरम् insatiable? दम्भमानमदान्विताः full of hypocrisy? pride and,arrogance? मोहात् through delusion? गृहीत्वा having held? असद्ग्राहान् evil ideas? प्रवर्तन्ते they work? अशुचिव्रताः with impure resolves.Commentary These soulless malevolent persons perform cruel and sinful actions. Their minds are saturated with vanity? conceit and arrogance. They entertain in their minds unholy resolves and unreasonable ideas. They harbour insatiable desires in their hearts. Just as a monkey becomes more and more intoxicated if wine if given to it? so also the older they grow the more and more arrogant and lustful do they become. They cause the ruin and death of those around them. They boast of their own actions and treat others with great contempt. They are very much attached to their bodies. They worship their bodies. Their passion is boundless. They are stupid and obstinate and so they have no firm determination.Desire is insatiable like fire. Enjoyment cannot bring about satisfaction of the desires. The more you enjoy? the stronger does the desire become. After an object is enjoyed? there springs up a desire to continue the enjoyment for ever. You take recourse to all sorts of devices to preserve the objects.Although a man is not righteous he pretends to be a man of righteousness. This is hypocrisy. Although a man is not worthy of being honoured? he claims to be so. This is Mana (pride). There is false dignity. Although a man does not possess great things he superimposes them on himself. This is Mada.These Asuras make impure resolves. I will worship such and such a deity by repeating such and such a Mantra and get hold of such and such a woman. I will repeat such and such a Mantra and kill such and such a man.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Giving themselves up to insatiable passions, hypocritical, self-sufficient and arrogant, cherishing false conception founded on delusion, they work only to carry out their own unholy purposes.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Giving themselves up to insatiable passions, hypocritical, self-sufficient and arrogant, cherishing false conception founded on delusion, they work only to carry out their own unholy purposes.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda describes the psychological state of a pure materialist. Driven by insatiable desire (duspuram kamam), they try to find permanent happiness in transient sense objects. This delusion (moha) breeds hypocrisy (dambha), vanity (mana), and pride (mada). To satisfy their unbridled lust, they operate with impure resolves (asuci-vratah), disregarding all moral values and the welfare of others. Their entire life becomes a chaotic struggle for personal gain, spreading distress and destruction around them. This analysis holds true for materialistic individuals as well as nations.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Holding to their  insatiable desire; being possessed by hypocricy, avarice, and pride; and holding evil intention, these cruel men wander with impure resolve.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Turning to insatiable desires, seizing through delusion unjustly acired wealth, and following impious vows, they act, full of ostentation, pride and arrogance.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Giving themselves up to insatiable passion, filled with vanity, pride and arrogance, adopting bad abjectives due to delusion, and having impure resolves, they engage in actions.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the Asuri people possess insatiable desires. To fulfill these, they resort to hypocrisy, pride, and arrogance, holding onto false ideas due to delusion and undertaking impure actions.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Taking shelter of insatiable desires, filled with hypocrisy, pride, and arrogance, and holding false views due to delusion, they act in the world with impure resolves.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that Asuri individuals rely on never-ending desires as the fuel for their lives, believing that desires are essential for progress. To achieve their goals, they use hypocrisy (showing off virtues they do not have), pride (thinking highly of themselves), and arrogance (intellectual or wealth-based intoxication). They make impure resolves (asuci-vratah), such as determining to ruin others, disregard family traditions, or consume forbidden things. Driven by delusion, they hold onto harmful superstitions or wrong philosophies.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Turning to 'insatiable desires,' viz., which concern objects impossible to get; seizing through 'delusion,' viz., through ignorance that such desires can be fulfilled only with 'unjustly acired wealth,' viz., with wealth unlawfully hoarded, and following impious vows, viz., associated with the vows prohibited in the Sastras; they do actions 'that are full of ostentation, pride and arrogance.'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.9–16.12 jointly): Etam etc. upto arthasancayam :  Their anxiety ends only at the time of dissolution i.e. never ceases, becaue the rise and dissolution never end.  This much alone :  For them the highest goal to be achieved is but the gratification of desires, and when this (aim) is just ruined, there arises anger.  Hence the Lord says 'Devoted to their craving and anger'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And asirtya, giving themselves upto; duspuram, insatiable; kamam, passion-a kind of desire; dambha-mana-mada-anvitah, filled with vanity, pride and arrogance; grhitva, adopting; asad-grahan, bad objectives, evil intentions; mohat, due to delusion, owing to non-discrimination; and asuci-vratah, having impure resolves; they pravartante, engage in actions in the world.
Further,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that Asuri people have insatiable desires for visible worldly objects. Out of hypocrisy and pride, they hold onto evil resolves, such as using forbidden mantras to attract women or discover hidden wealth, and engage in impure rites.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that due to insatiable desires, the demoniac worship minor deities using wine and meat. They hold onto evil resolves, thinking that they can acquire vast treasures by practicing impure rituals.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that Asuri people seek the fulfillment of low, insatiable desires. Driven by hypocrisy and pride, they adopt impure vows and practices prescribed by non-Vedic corrupt scriptures.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'asadgrahah' refers to unjustly acquired wealth and possessions. Hypocrisy and pride drive them to follow vows prohibited by the scriptures, focusing only on their selfish desires.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that Asuri souls worship minor deities with impure practices to satisfy their impossible desires, thinking these actions will bring them success and happiness.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'asadgrahah' refers to their stubborn obsession with useless and harmful pursuits like magic or wealth-finding. They practice impure vows involving meat or alcohol.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Taking shelter of insatiable lust and absorbed in the conceit of pride and false prestige, the demoniac, thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work, attracted by the impermanent.

 The demoniac mentality is described here. The demons have no satiation for their lust. They will go on increasing and increasing their insatiable desires for material enjoyment. Although they are always full of anxieties on account of accepting nonpermanent things, they still continue to engage in such activities out of illusion. They have no knowledge and cannot tell that they are heading the wrong way. Accepting nonpermanent things, such demoniac people create their own God, create their own hymns and chant accordingly. The result is that they become more and more attracted to two things – sex enjoyment and accumulation of material wealth. The word aśuci-vratāḥ, “unclean vows,” is very significant in this connection. Such demoniac people are only attracted by wine, women, gambling and meat-eating; those are their aśuci, unclean habits. Induced by pride and false prestige, they create some principles of religion which are not approved by the Vedic injunctions. Although such demoniac people are most abominable in the world, by artificial means the world creates a false honor for them. Although they are gliding toward hell, they consider themselves very much advanced.