Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
tyājyaṃ doṣavadityeke karma prāhurmanīṣiṇaḥ .
yajñadānatapaḥkarma na tyājyamiti cāpare

Word Meanings:
त्याज्यम् - should be abandoned
दोषवत् - as an evil
इति - thus
एके - some
कर्म - action
प्राहुः - declare
मनीषिणः - philosophers
यज्ञदानतपःकर्म - acts of sacrifice
न - not
त्याज्यम् - should be relinished
इति - thus
च - and
अपरे - others.

Life Application:
Some philosophers say action should be abandoned as evil; others say acts of sacrifice, gift, austerity should not be abandoned.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Some wise men say that all actions, being defective, should be abandoned; and others say that actions of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Some philosophers declare that actions should be abandoned as an evil; while others (declare) that acts of sacrifice, gift and austerity should not be relinished.

त्याज्यम् should be abandoned? दोषवत् (full of) as an evil? इति thus? एके some? कर्म action? प्राहुः declare? मनीषिणः philosophers? यज्ञदानतपःकर्म acts of sacrifice? gift and austerity? न not? त्याज्यम् should be relinished? इति thus? च and? अपरे others.Commentary Some philosophers who follow the doctrine of the Sankhyas declare that all actions,should be abandoned as evil? even by those who are fit for Karma Yoga.Doshavat As an evil All Karmas should be abandoned as involving evil because they cause bondage or that they should be relinished like passion and other such evil tendencies.Others declare that the acts of sacrifice? gifts and austerities should not be given up by those who are fit for Karma Yoga. These are the opinions of some? who are of great understanding.Now listen to Me. I will settle this matter and will tell thee how renunciation should be practised.The subject of the discourse here is about the Karma Yogins only and not about those persons who have gone beyond the path of Karma. It is with reference to the Karma Yogins that these conflicting opinions are held and not with reference to the Jnana Yogins or the Sannyasins who have risen above all worldly concerns.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Some philosophers say that all action is evil and should be abandoned. Others that acts of sacrifice, benevolence and austerity should not be given up.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In the previous verse, it was stated conclusively that abandonment is the means and renunciation is the goal. Regarding this abandonment, the supporters of the Sankhya doctrine hold the opinion that all actions should be abandoned as they are defective. According to them, all actions generate vasanas (desires) which shroud the Self. Hence, actions must be completely abandoned. But some commentators of the Sankhya philosophy say that only those actions which are prompted by desire and selfishness should be abandoned, and not that all actions are to be given up. The advice of the truth-seeking wise men is that seekers should abandon desire-motivated (kamya) and forbidden (nishiddha) actions, and perform their obligatory duties. Character is built only by performing righteous deeds. According to these commentators, actions in the form of sacrifice, charity, and austerity should not be abandoned. Students of the Gita should know that Lord Krishna advises Arjuna to abandon only those actions that are defective. His call to humanity is that one should worship God through one's actions. This is spiritual practice. The Lord's decision is that the ignorant must perform actions. Regarding the above alternatives, He says—

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Certain wise men delcare that the harmful action is to be relinished while others say that the actions of performing sacrifices, giving gifts and observing austerities should not be relinished.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Some sages say that all actions should be given up as evil; others declare that works such as sacrifices, gifts and austerities should not be given up.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Some learned persons say that action, beset with evil (as it is), should be given up, and others (say) that the practice of sacrifice, charity and austertiy should not be given up.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Since the term 'manishinah' (wise men) is used, the prima facie view is also acceptable. In that view, abandonment of sacrifice etc., is intended as the abandonment of the fruits of action. He will also say later, 'but he who abandons the fruits of action' (18.11). Therefore, this is indeed a single view.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
To strengthen the stated view—that having abandoned desire-motivated (kamya) actions, the daily obligatory (nitya) and occasional (naimittika) actions must be performed without desiring their fruits—by refuting the opposing views, the Lord states the divergence of opinion: 'should be abandoned' (tyajyam). He states the reason for all actions being defective: because they cause bondage. Alternatively, he explains the word 'doshavat' (as an evil) as an illustration, saying: 'or'. Anticipating the objection that action should be abandoned only by those who are not qualified for action, since those qualified for action incur sin by abandoning it, he says: 'of those who are qualified' (adhikritanam). The idea is that there is indeed no sin for them also in abandoning action, since sin is incurred only by performing actions that involve injury and so forth. The word 'iti' (thus) marks the conclusion of the view of the Sankhyas and others. He states the view of the Mimamsakas: 'in that very context' (tatraiva), that is to say, only among those who are qualified for action. Action refers to daily obligatory and occasional duties. Anticipating the doubt that the alternatives shown in the two verses starting with 'kamyanam karmanam...' apply in relation to the active and the inactive, the qualified and the unqualified, he says: 'men of action' (karminah). He explains what is excluded by the word 'eva' (only) by saying: 'but not' (na tu). He clarifies the same: 'steadfast in Knowledge' (jnana). He objects: Just as those qualified for action, though previously described as having a separate steadfastness from those steadfast in Knowledge, are again considered in the section summarizing the purport of the scripture, it is not contradictory that those steadfast in Knowledge should also be considered here. He states the reply: 'not for them' (na tesham), i.e., there is no discussion here regarding the Sankhyas who are steadfast in the knowledge of the Supreme Truth. To the objection that since they also perceive pain and suffering in their own self and consequently abandon rajasika actions, they too should be considered, he says: 'not due to physical body' (na kaya). In support of this, he adduces the reason stated in the chapter on the Field: 'of desire, etc.' (ichchhadinam) being attributes of the Field. He states the result of the Sankhyas not perceiving suffering etc. in their own self: 'therefore' (atah). To the objection that even if they do not perceive suffering, they may still perceive actions in their own self and abandon them because they cause physical pain, he says: 'nor indeed' (na api). Holding that while the ignorant may abandon even obligatory actions due to the power of delusion, the knowers of Truth cannot do so because they do not perceive actions in their own self, and thus lack any reason to abandon them, he says: 'out of delusion' (mohat). How then is there renunciation or abandonment for them who do not perceive actions in their own self, when no action is ever obtained by them? To this he says: 'of the gunas' (gunanam). Reminding that the abandonment of actions by the knowers of Truth refers to the abandonment of actions that were superimposed through non-discrimination, he rejects the prohibition of what is not obtained by saying: 'all' (sarva). He states the conclusion of the knowers of Truth not being subject to discussion here: 'therefore' (tasmat), which connects with what follows: 'only those who are ignorant of the Self'. He shows the possibility of abandonment of action by those who are qualified for action but are ignorant of the Self: 'and for whom' (yesham cha). Anticipating the question of what purpose the condemnation of such abandonment serves, he says: 'for the men of action' (karminam). Furthermore, since the real renouncers are found to be praiseworthy, they cannot be the objects of condemnation; so he says: 'all' (sarva), i.e., sarvarambha-parityagi etc. Moreover, since the steadfastness in Knowledge will be described later in the passage starting with 'He will say' (vakshyati). He concludes that only those qualified for action are intended here, and not those steadfast in Knowledge: 'therefore' (tasmat). To the objection that since the word sannyasa denotes the renunciation of all actions, such renouncers must be intended here, he says: 'action' (karma), i.e., karma-phala-tyaga. He objects: The word sannyasa must be taken in its primary sense, since when a word has both a primary and a secondary meaning, the primary meaning is accepted; otherwise, the statement of the reason for its impossibility would be useless, and it would be a prohibition of what is not obtained. He refutes this by saying 'no' (na) etc., explaining that this statement of the reason does not establish the impossibility of the renunciation of all actions, but is meant to praise the renunciation of the fruits of action. He clarifies this with an illustration: 'just as' (yatha). Anticipating the objection that in the illustration also the literal sense should be accepted, he says: 'as stated' (yathokta). The meaning is that liberation is not possible through the abandonment of fruits alone without Knowledge, because that would contradict the Sruti and Smriti texts which establish that liberation depends solely on Knowledge, and it would render useless the subsequent injunction of the means to Knowledge starting with 'adveshta' (12.13); therefore, it must be understood here as a mere praise of abandonment. He applies the meaning of the illustration to the case in hand: 'similarly' (tatha). To the objection that the statement of the reason should have its primary sense, intending to state an exception to the previously mentioned view, he says 'no' (na sarva), since there is no reason for such an exception. The idea is that this statement of the reason itself cannot be the exception, as its explanation as a praise has already been shown. Anticipating the question of how the alternatives of sannyasa and tyaga can have any scope if there is no exception to primary renunciation, he says: 'therefore' (tasmat). Since the said alternatives do not apply to those steadfast in Knowledge, he states where their qualification lies: 'but those who' (ye tu). Since it has been established in many places that renouncers, being unfit for these alternatives, have qualification only in the steadfastness of Knowledge, there is no need to prove it further; so he says: 'similarly' (tatha).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Sri Bhagavan said -- Some wise men say that the abandonment of desire-motivated actions is sannyasa, and others say that the abandonment of the fruits of all actions is tyaga. Some wise men say that actions should be abandoned as defects, and others say that actions of sacrifice, charity, and austerity should not be abandoned.

Commentary -- There are four views of philosophical scholars:
1 -- 'kamyanam karmanam nyasam sannyasam kavayo viduh' -- Some wise men say that the abandonment of desire-motivated actions is called sannyasa, i.e., the abandonment of actions performed for obtaining the desired and avoiding the undesired is called sannyasa.
2 -- 'sarvakarmaphalatyagam prahur tyagam vichakshanah' -- Some wise men say that the abandonment of the desire for the fruits of all actions is called tyaga, i.e., performing obligatory duties without desiring the fruits is called tyaga.
3 -- 'tyajyam doshavadityeke karma prahurmanishinah' -- Some wise men say that all actions should be abandoned like defects.
4 -- 'yajnadanatapahkarma na tyajyamiti capare' -- Other wise men say that even if all other actions are abandoned, actions of sacrifice, charity, and austerity should not be abandoned.
In the above four views, two divisions are seen: the first and third views belong to sannyasa (Sankhya Yoga), and the second and fourth views belong to tyaga (Karma Yoga). Even in these two divisions, there is a slight difference. In the first view, there is abandonment of only desire-motivated actions, and in the third view, there is abandonment of all actions. Similarly, in the second view, there is abandonment of the fruits of actions, and in the fourth view, there is a prohibition of abandoning actions of sacrifice, charity, and austerity.
The shortcomings of the above four views of philosophers and the unique features of the Lord's view in comparison to them are discussed as follows:
1 -- 'kamyanam karmanam nyasam sannyasam' -- In this first view of sannyasa, only the abandonment of desire-motivated actions is stated, but besides this, daily (nitya) and occasional (naimittika) necessary duties remain. Therefore, this view is not complete, because it neither mentions the abandonment of doership nor establishment in the Self. However, in the Lord's view, there is no ego of doership in actions, and establishment in the Self is achieved. For instance, in the seventeenth verse of this chapter, He states: 'He who is free from the egoistic notion and whose intellect is not tainted' -- thus describing the abandonment of doership, and 'even if he slays these people, he does not slay, nor is he bound' -- thus describing establishment in the Self.
2 -- 'tyajyam doshavadityeke' -- In this second view of sannyasa, there is mention of abandoning all actions like defects. However, no one can completely abandon all actions (Gita 3.5), and life's journey cannot be maintained by abandoning all actions (Gita 3.8). Therefore, the Lord has described the abandonment of obligatory duties in form as rajasika or tamasika abandonment (Gita 18.7, 8).
3 -- 'sarvakarmaphalatyagam' -- In this first view of tyaga, only the abandonment of fruits is mentioned. Here, under the abandonment of fruits, only the abandonment of desire is included. We cannot include the abandonment of possessiveness and attachment under this, because if we do so, there will be no difference between the views of the philosophers and the Lord. In the Lord's view, the abandonment of both attachment to action and attachment to its fruits is mentioned: 'abandoning attachment and fruits' (Gita 18.6).
4 -- 'yajnadanatapahkarma na tyajyam' -- In this second view of tyaga, i.e., Karma Yoga, there is mention of not abandoning actions of sacrifice, charity, and austerity. However, nothing has been said about performing or not performing other actions related to varna, ashrama, circumstances, etc. -- this is its incompleteness. In the Lord's view, these actions should not only be not abandoned, but if they are not being done, they must surely be performed, and besides these, actions like pilgrimage, vows, etc., should also be performed by abandoning attachment and fruits (18.5, 6).
Connection -- After stating the four views of the philosophical scholars in the previous two verses, now the Lord states His own view regarding abandonment in the next three verses.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Some sages, viz., the adherents of Kapila and those Vaidikas who agree with his creed, contend that all acts such as sacrifices etc., should be renounced by aspirants for release, as they bind even as desires and other similar defects tend to bind. Other learned men say that acts like sacrifices etc., should not be renounced.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Tyajyam etc.  The harmful :  that which is connected with sin, becuase it consists of act of injury etc.  Such an action must be relinished and not all aciton that has auspicious result.  In this way certain persons-as if they are attached  (as domesticated animals do )  to the house of the Sankhyas - think of a distinction is relinishing.  But there are other learned persons who put on the coat of the Mimamsakas and who, basing exclusively the scriptures, classify what action to be performed and what action not to be performed .  They opine :  The act of killing that constitutes the technical aspect of execution of a sacrifice is [in fact] not an act of injury at all in view of the principles, like
 
'The action intended for sacrifice is indeed known from the scripture only' - (SB, IV, i, 2)
 and  
'Therefore the act of injury known from the Vedas' etc. - (SV, I, i, 2.23)
 
For, the general rule 'Don't injure' is  annulled in  this case.  But, at the same time the Syena-sacrifice etc., is an act of killing.  Becuase,
 
'The injunctive suffix does not prescribe what falls within the purveiw of fruit of an action of the injunction.'  [SV, I, i, 2.222).
 
Therefore other [Vedic] sacrifices one should not relinish eventhough they are connected with an act of injury.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Eke, some; manisinah, learned ones, subscribing to the views of the Sankhyas and others; prahuh, say; that dosavat, beset with evil (as it is);-What is it?- karma, action, all actions, becuase they are the cause of bondage; tyajyam, should be given up even by those who are eligible for actions (rites and duties). Or, it (action) is to be given up dosavat, just as defects such as attachment etc. are renounced. Ca and, in that very context; apare, others; (say) that yajana-dana-tapah-karma, the practice of sacrifice, charity and auterity; na tyajyam, should not be given up. 
These alternatives are with regard to only those who are alified for action, but not with regard to the monks who are steadfast in Knowledge and have gone beyond the stages of life. This discussion is not concerned with those who are held to be outside the scope of eligibility for action in the assertion (by the Lord), 'The steadfastness in the Yoga of Knowledge by men of realization was spoken of by Me in the days of yore' (see 3.3).
Objection: Well, just as those who are alified for rites and duties and who have their distinct steadfastness are being considered here in the chapter summarizing the entire scripture, though they have been dealt with earlier in '৷৷.through the Yoga of Action for the yogis' (3.3), similarly, let even the men of realization who are steadfast in Knowledge be considered here.
Reply: No, because it is not logical that their renunciation should result from delusion and sorrow (cf. 7 and 8). The men of realization do not perceive in the Self the sorrows arising from physical torment; for it has been shown that desire etc. are attributes only of the field (body) (see 13.6). Therefore, they do not renounce action but of fear for physical trouble and pain. Nor do they perceive actions in the Self, on account of which they should give up obligatory duties out of delusion. In fact, they renounce with the conviction that 'action belongs to the organs' (see 3.28); 'I certainly do not do anything' (see 5.8); for, the mode of renunciation of an enlightened person was shown in, '৷৷.having given up all actions mentally' (5.13). Therefore, those others who are alified for rites and duties, who are unelightened about the Self, and for whom renunciation is possible out of delusion and from fear of physical trouble, are alone condemned as persons who, being possessed of tamas and rajas, resort to renunciation. And this is done with a veiw to eulogizing the renunciation of the results of rites and duties by the unenlightened men of action.
Besides, the men of renunciation in the real sense have been particularly pointed out in, 'who has renounced ever undertaking,' 'who is silent, content with anything, homeless, steadyminded' (12.16, 19), and also (while determining) the characteristics of one who has transcended the gunas (Chapter 14). The Lord will further say, '৷৷.which is the supreme consummation of Knowledge' (50). Therefore the monks steadfast in Knowledge are not intended to be spoken of here. It is only the abandoning of the results of action which, by virtue of its being imbued with the ality of sattva, is spoken of as sannyasa in contrast to the renunciation of actions which is possessed of tamas etc.; it is not sannyasa in the primary-sense-the renunciation of all actions.
Objection: According to the reason shown in the text, 'Since it is not possible for one who holds on to a body to give up actions entirely' (11), may it not be argued that the actions entirely' (11), may it not be argued that the word sannyasa is certainly used in the primary sense because it is impossible to abandon all works?
Reply: No, for the next adducing the reason is meant for eulogy. Just as, 'From renunciation immediately (follows) Peace' (12.12), is a mere eulogy of renunciation of the fruits of action, it having been enjoined on Arjuna who was unenlightened and incapable of undertaking the various alternatives (paths) as stated earlier, so also is this sentence, 'Since it is not possible for one who holds on to a body to give up actions entirely' (11), meant for eulogizing the renunciation of the resorts of all actions. No one can point an exception to the proposition that 'having given up all actions mentally, (the embodied man of self-control) continues happily৷৷.without doing or causing (others) to do anything at all' (see 5.13). Therefore these alternative veiws regarding sannyasa and tyaga are concerned only with those who are alified for rites and duties. But the enlightened ones who have realized the supreme Truth are competent only for steadfastness in Knowledge, which is characterized by renunciation of all actions; not for anything else. Hence, they do not come within the purview of the alternative veiws. Thus has this been pointed out by us in connection with the text, '৷৷.he who knows this One as indestructible৷৷.' (2.21) as also in the beginning of the third chapter.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Some say that by the words 'should be abandoned as an evil' (tyajyam doshavat), the rejectable view of the Kapilas (Sankhyas) has been presented. Keeping in mind that this is incorrect, he says: 'the wise' (manishinah). The prima facie view is the one presented earlier. Objection: How is this view acceptable when it contradicts the Lord's own opinion, namely, 'Acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned, but must indeed be performed' (18.5)? In response, he says: 'by abandonment of fruits' (phala-tyagena). In their view, the abandonment of sacrifice etc. is intended as the abandonment of their fruits, not literal abandonment. Why? Precisely because of the qualification 'the wise' (manishinah). Therefore, this is not contrary to the Lord's opinion. How does the term 'abandonment of action' mean abandonment of fruits? In response, he says: 'but he who...' (18.11). Objection: If that is so, then does it not mean that there is no contradiction between the views presented in the first and second halves of the verse? He says: 'True, therefore...' (atah). Therefore, being the view of the wise, this is a single, uncontradictory view. The view presented in the first and second halves is one, but this dispute has been raised based on superficial appearance as a seed of doubt.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Some say: 'it should be abandoned as an evil' (tyajyam doshavad). Some Sankhyas say that all action should be abandoned because it is accompanied by faults such as injury. The author praises them as 'the wise' (manishinah) because they demonstrate reasoning. Others, the Mimamsakas, say that acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity, even though they yield results, should not be abandoned because they are enjoined by the scriptures. Though mistaken, they are correct in one aspect, as they do not abandon the Vedas in any part. Although the former group also do not abandon them, this has been presented based on superficial understanding. In reality, by saying 'of desire-motivated actions', it is implied that non-desire-motivated actions are enjoined; keeping this in mind, they are called poets/sages (kavitva). Further, by using 'discerning' (vichakshanah) and 'evil' (doshavat), the wisdom of performing faultless actions is stated there.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Now, in order to answer the second question and to describe the three-fold meaning of the words 'sannyasa' (renunciation) and 'tyaga' (abandonment), he states the divergence of opinion: 'should be abandoned' (tyajyam). Some wise men (manishinah) say that all action, being full of defects because it causes bondage, should be abandoned even by those qualified for action. Or, 'doshavat' means 'like a defect'; just as defects such as attachment and aversion are abandoned, similarly, action should be abandoned even by those qualified for action who have not yet attained realization or the desire for knowledge—this is the view of some. On the other hand, the second view is: for those qualified for action, in order to generate the desire for knowledge through the purification of the mind, the actions of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned—so say other wise men.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
To strengthen the view that for the ignorant, the meaning of the word 'abandonment' (tyaga) is merely the abandonment of the fruits of action and not the abandonment of action itself, by refuting other views, he shows the difference of opinion: 'should be abandoned' (tyajyam). Some Sankhyas, called 'the wise' (manishinah), say that all action should be abandoned because it is defective, i.e., it causes bondage due to defects like injury. Their idea is as follows: The prohibition 'Do not injure any living being' states that injury is a cause of harm to a person. On the other hand, the contextual injunction 'One should sacrifice an animal to Agni and Soma' states that injury is helpful to the sacrifice. Therefore, because they have different scopes, they do not fall under the rule of general and particular, and there is no relation of sublation between them. Since injury is possible in all actions performed with material objects, all action should indeed be abandoned. As it is said: 'The Vedic means is like the temporal means, for it is linked with impurity, decay, and excess' (Sankhya Karika 2). The meaning is: the means like Jyotishtoma, etc., are heard from the teaching of the teacher, just like temporal means; hence 'anushrava' is the Veda, and what is taught by it is 'anushravikah'. There, 'impurity' refers to injury, and 'decay' refers to destruction. Also, there is a variation in the heavens attained through Agnihotra, Jyotishtoma, etc. The superior status of others makes everyone else unhappy. On the other hand, the Mimamsakas say that actions like sacrifice should not be abandoned. Their view is: even if this injury is for the sake of the sacrifice, it must be performed by a person, and even if done for another purpose, it is indeed a cause of sin for the person. For, an injunction ordains the performance of what is to be enjoined for that purpose, as subservience is characterized by that purpose. But a prohibition does not similarly depend on that purpose, for it requires only the occurrence of the action. Otherwise, there would be no sin in actions done out of ignorance or negligence. Thus, since they have the same scope, the general scripture is sublated by the particular, and there is no defectiveness; therefore, daily obligatory actions like sacrifice should not be abandoned. By this, the equal strength of injunction and prohibition is warded off in order to establish the rule of general and particular.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
To strengthen the view that having abandoned desire-motivated (kamya) actions, the daily obligatory (nitya) and occasional (naimittika) actions must be performed without desiring their fruits—by refuting the opposing views, the Lord states the divergence of opinion: 'should be abandoned' (tyajyam). 'doshavat' means 'accompanied by defects', i.e., because they cause bondage. Or, it means 'like a defect', just as defects like attachment and aversion are abandoned, so also all actions should be abandoned. Some wise men (manishinah), i.e., intelligent pundits who follow the Sankhya view, say that all action should be abandoned even by those qualified for action. Objection: How can they say that abandonment of action by those qualified for action does not cause sin? In reply, understand that this is with the idea that there is no sin in abandoning actions accompanied by injury etc., whereas their performance is what causes sin. Others, who follow the Mimamsaka view, say that acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned. Their view is: since the prohibition 'Do not injure any living being' is meaningful in prohibiting injury other than the injury ordained by injunctions such as 'One should sacrifice an animal to Agni and Soma', the action ordained by injunctions does not bring sin; on the contrary, the abandonment of what is ordained brings sin, and therefore all action should not be abandoned. These alternatives apply only in relation to those qualified for action, and not to those steadfast in Knowledge who have renounced all possessions. It is in relation to the renouncers who are free from eligibility for action, as stated in 'The steadfastness of the Sankhyas through the Yoga of Knowledge was spoken of by Me'. Objection: Just as those qualified for action who perform action, though previously described as having a separate steadfastness, are considered here in the section summarizing the purport of the scripture, similarly, the Sankhyas who are steadfast in Knowledge should also be considered here. Thus, the statement that these alternatives exclude the renouncers is incorrect. Reply: No, because they perceive actions as 'actions of the gunas' and 'I do not do anything at all', seeing them only as attributes of the Field; therefore, it is impossible to say that they abandon obligatory actions out of delusion or out of fear of physical trouble and pain, and thus their abandonment cannot be caused by delusion or pain. Moreover, the mode of renunciation of the knowers of Truth has been described in 'Renouncing all actions mentally, the self-controlled embodied one dwells happily in the city of nine gates, neither acting nor causing action'. Objection: In the cited text, since it says 'mentally', is it not a renunciation of bodily actions? Since it is qualified by 'all actions', does it mean all of them? Reply: No, because the meaning is 'all mental actions'. If you say 'having mentally abandoned all other actions except the causes of bodily activities, one does not live', that is not so, because then the qualification 'dwells in the city of nine gates' would be inappropriate. Therefore, the mode of renunciation of the knowers of Truth is described by the cited passages and others, and since their abandonment cannot be caused by delusion etc., those who are qualified for action but are ignorant of the Self—for whom abandonment out of delusion and fear of physical trouble is possible—are condemned as tamasika and rajasika abandoners, in order to praise the renunciation of the fruits of action by the ignorant men of action. Furthermore, the real renouncers are characterized in chapters fourteen and twelve, in passages like 'He who is the same to friend and foe, and also in honor and dishonor, who is the same in heat and cold, in pleasure and pain, who is free from attachment...' and 'He to whom censure and praise are equal, who is silent, content with anything, homeless, steady-minded, full of devotion—that man is dear to Me'. Also, it will be said later: 'which is the supreme consummation of Knowledge' (18.50). Therefore, the renouncers steadfast in Knowledge are not intended here; rather, the renouncers ignorant of the Self are praised as sattvika by comparison with the tamasika and rajasika ones. Nor should one be deluded into thinking that this is primary renunciation because of the statement of the reason: 'For it is not possible for an embodied being to abandon actions completely' (18.11). For, like the text 'Peace immediately follows abandonment' (12.12), this statement of the reason is also meant as a praise. This is the summary.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Thus, by the verse 'kamyanam...' (18.2), the conflict was shown through the opposition of fruits and its absence. Now, by the verse 'tyajyam doshavat...', the dispute is shown through the presence and absence of inherent defects in the action itself, in terms of sinfulness etc. Even ritual injury (vaidha himsa) is accepted as a defect by the followers of Kapila (Sankhyas) due to its prohibited nature. As stated by Ishvarakrishna: 'The Vedic means is like the temporal means, for it is impure, and linked with decay and excess' (Sankhya Karika 2). And it was said by Panchashikhacharya: 'It is a small impurity, easily remediable, and accompanied by regret.' Therefore, in their view, ritual injury brings defect to the person and assists the sacrifice. Hence, the proponents referred to generally by the word 'eke' (some) are specifically indicated by the power of the logical connection of 'doshavat' (as an evil) or by the force of the illustration of defects; so he says: 'the followers of Kapila and those Vaidikas who follow their creed'. By this, the view of those who advocate the literal renunciation of all actions is also shown to be outside the Vedas. 'Like defects such as attachment etc.' (ragadi-doshavat)—since it is accepted by all established doctrines that defects like attachment are binding, that is the illustration. Or, the meaning is that action itself is like the defect of attachment etc., and therefore binding. In this interpretation, the word 'etc.' also includes injury etc. 'All actions such as sacrifice etc.' (sarvam yajnadikam karma)—although the word 'action' (karma) here is of general application, because it is qualified in the other view as 'acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned' (18.3), and because there is no specific differentiator and to avoid repetition with the subject of desire-motivated actions, it refers to all actions. Since if it were to be abandoned by all, the scriptures ordaining them would become unauthoritative, it is qualified as 'by the seeker of liberation' (mumukshuna). The word 'apare' (others) here refers to those who follow His own view. With the intention of stating His own view later as 'Acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned, but must indeed be performed' (18.5), he says 'panditah' (learned men), which means those who know the truth of the distinction between what is to be abandoned and what is to be accepted.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Furthermore: 'should be abandoned' (tyajyam). Some wise men (manishinah), i.e., discerning thinkers, say that action devoid of the means to knowledge etc. should be abandoned as a defect ('doshavat'); they say this with emphasis based on authority etc. Others, the Mimamsakas (ritualists), say that acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned, because they are ordained by scriptures. As it is said: 'Therefore they say sacrifice is supreme' (Mahanarayana Upanishad 17.10), 'Therefore they say charity is supreme' (ibid. 17.5), and 'Therefore they say austerity is supreme' (ibid. 17.5). By this, they proclaim that action itself is Ishvara (God), and therefore they also do not know.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He states these two views: 'should be abandoned' (tyajyam). Some principal wise men (manishinah), who are capable of controlling the mind, say that for men in whom the desire to know the Supreme Self has arisen, action should be abandoned like a defect ('doshavat'), just as attachment and aversion are abandoned. Others say that for the seeker of the desire to know, sacrifice etc. should not be abandoned—this follows. Accordingly, two kinds of Sruti texts are found: 'Not by action, nor by progeny, nor by wealth, but by renunciation alone some attained immortality' (Kaivalya Upanishad 1.2), and 'Only performing actions here, one should desire to live a hundred years' (Isha Upanishad 2), and so forth. These two views concern only the ignorant. For the wise, however, since ignorance, which is the cause of engagement in action, has been destroyed, abandonment is self-established; therefore, neither the injunction for action nor the injunction for its abandonment applies to them. As it is said: 'The yogi should not abandon actions; indeed, he is abandoned by actions.'

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should be given up as faulty, yet other sages maintain that acts of sacrifice, charity and penance should never be abandoned.

 There are many activities in the Vedic literature which are subjects of contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed in a sacrifice, yet some maintain that animal killing is completely abominable. Although animal killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedic literature, the animal is not considered to be killed. The sacrifice is to give a new life to the animal. Sometimes the animal is given a new animal life after being killed in the sacrifice, and sometimes the animal is promoted immediately to the human form of life. But there are different opinions among the sages. Some say that animal killing should always be avoided, and others say that for a specific sacrifice it is good. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are now being clarified by the Lord Himself.