Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
buddherbhedaṃ dhṛteścaiva guṇatastrividhaṃ śṛṇu .
procyamānamaśeṣeṇa pṛthaktvena dhanañjaya

Word Meanings:
बुद्धेः - of intellect
भेदम् - division
धृतेः - of firmness
च - and
एव - even
गुणतः - according to qualities
त्रिविधम् - threefold
श्रृणु - hear
प्रोच्यमानम् - as I declare
अशेषेण - fully
पृथक्त्वेन - distinctly
धनञ्जय - O Dhananjaya.

Life Application:
Hear threefold division of intellect and fortitude according to gunas, fully and individually.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Dhananjaya, hear the threefold division of intellect and fortitude according to the gunas, as declared by Me fully and distinctly.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Hear thou the threefold division of intellect and firmness according to the Gunas, as I declare them fully and distinctly, O Arjuna.

बुद्धेः of intellect? भेदम् division? धृतेः of firmness? च and? एव even? गुणतः according to alities? त्रिविधम् threefold? श्रृणु hear? प्रोच्यमानम् as I declare? अशेषेण fully? पृथक्त्वेन distinctly? धनञ्जय O Dhananjaya.Commentary Dhananjaya The coneror of wealth Arjuna is so called because he acired much material and spiritual wealth during his tours of conest (Digvijaya) to the four arters of the earth.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Reason and conviction are threefold, according to the Quality which is dominant. I will explain them fully and severally, O Arjuna!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Action is driven by knowledge, action itself, and the doer. To sustain action toward a goal, two factors are essential: Buddhi (understanding/reason) and Dhrti (fortitude/determination). Buddhi represents the human capacity to understand what ought to be done and the meaning of external events. Dhrti is the willpower or holding power to persist despite obstacles. Without these two, a person would wander aimlessly like a dry leaf. The Lord now describes the three divisions of understanding and determination according to the Gunas.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
You must listen [from Me] to the three-fold division of the intellect and also of content both being expounded completely and individually,  [by Me] basing on the Strands, O Dhananjaya !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Hear now, the threefold division of Buddhi (reason) and Dhrti (fortitude), O Arjuna, according to the Gunas, fully and severally to be set forth.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Dhananjaya, listen to the classification of the intellect as also of fortitude, which is threefold according to the gunas, while it is being stated elaborately and severally.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having explained the threefold division of knowledge, action, and doer, the Lord promises to explain the threefold division of intellect (buddhi) and determination (dhrti) according to Gunas.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Hear now, O Dhananjaya, the threefold division of intellect and fortitude according to Gunas, described by Me fully and separately.

Commentary: Arjuna is called Dhananjaya ('conqueror of wealth') because he brought back immense wealth after defeating kings. The Lord implies that the real wealth is to adopt Sattvic understanding and determination. Intellect (Buddhi) makes decisions, and fortitude (Dhrti) is the inner capacity to stay firm on those decisions. For a seeker, knowing the types of Buddhi and Dhrti is crucial to rise above the material world.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Buddhi' is the knowledge in the form of discriminative determination. 'Dhrti' is the resolution to hold on with perseverance to what has been undertaken even against all obstacles. Of these two, hear now the threefold division according to Sattva and other Gunas.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.26–18.29 jointly): Explains the threefold nature of the agent. An agent free from attachment and egoism, endowed with fortitude and enthusiasm, is Sattvika. An agent swayed by passion, craving fruit, greedy and impure, is Rajasa. An agent discordant, vulgar, obstinate, deceitful, and indolent is Tamasa.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O Dhananjaya, srnu, listen; bhedam, to the classification; buddheh, of the intellect; ca eva, as also; the classification dhrteh, of fortitude; trividham, which is threefold; gunatah, according to the gunas, sattva etc. -this much is an apporistic statement-; procyamanam, while it is being stated; asesena, elaborately, just as it is, without omitting anything; and prthaktvena, severally.
Arjuna is called Dhananjaya because, in the course of his expedition to coner all the qaurters. he won immense human and divine wealth (dhana).

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Listen to the threefold classification of intellect and fortitude, which is being declared fully and separately.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Listen, O Dhananjaya, to the threefold division of intellect (determination) and fortitude according to Gunas, as expounded by Me fully and separately, defining what is to be accepted and what is to be avoided.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Now hear the threefold division of intellect and fortitude according to Gunas.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Hear, O Dhananjaya, the threefold division of intellect and fortitude according to Gunas, as stated by Me fully and separately, with discrimination of what is to be adopted and what is to be rejected.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In order to remove any confusion with the previously stated knowledge, Buddhi here means discriminative determination, and Dhrti is the perseverance to carry out the act against obstacles. Hear their Guna-wise division.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
In order to explain the organs/instruments, hear now the Guna-wise threefold division of intellect and fortitude, stated fully and separately.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The doer and knowledge have been described. Now hear the Guna-wise division of understanding itself (Buddhi) and its specific state called fortitude (Dhrti).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O winner of wealth, now please listen as I tell you in detail of the different kinds of understanding and determination, according to the three modes of material nature.

 Now after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower, in three different divisions according to the modes of material nature, the Lord is explaining the intelligence and determination of the worker in the same way.