Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yadagre cānubandhe ca sukhaṃ mohanamātmanaḥ .
nidrālasyapramādotthaṃ tattāmasamudāhṛtam

Word Meanings:
यत् - which
अग्रे - at first
च - and
अनुबन्धे - in the seel
च - and
सुखम् - pleasure
मोहनम् - delusive
आत्मनः - of the self
निद्रालस्यप्रमादोत्थम् - arising from sleep
तत् - that
तामसम् - Tamasic
उदाहृतम् - is declared.

Life Application:
Happiness delusive to self in beginning and end, arising from sleep, indolence, heedlessness—is Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
That happiness which both in the beginning and in the sequel is delusive to the self, arising from sleep, indolence and heedlessness, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
That happiness which at first as well as in the seel deludes the self, and which arises from sleep, indolence and heedlessness  that is declared to be Tamasic.

यत् which? अग्रे at first? च and? अनुबन्धे in the seel? च and? सुखम् pleasure? मोहनम् delusive? आत्मनः of the self? निद्रालस्यप्रमादोत्थम् arising from sleep? indolence and heedlessness? तत् that? तामसम् Tamasic? उदाहृतम् is declared.Commentary Anubandhe In the conseence after the termination. The pleasure that is begotten by evil habits like drinking liors and eating worthless things is delusive of the self. The man becomes oblivious of the path he ought to tread. Such pleasure is verily of the nature of darkness.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
While the pleasure which from first to last merely drugs the senses, which springs from indolence, lethargy and folly - that pleasure flows from Ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Tamasic happiness deludes the self from beginning to end by obscuring the distinction between the Self and non-Self. Its sources are sleep (both physical sleep and ignorance of one's true nature), indolence (laziness and avoiding action), and heedlessness (negligence, ignoring higher values to indulge in lower animal tendencies). This pleasure leads to complete degradation of the individual.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The happiness which, [both] at the beginning and subseently, is of the nature of  deluding the Self; and which results from  sleep, indolence and heedleness-that is stated to be of the Tamas (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That pleasure which, at the beginning and at the end, deludes the self, through sleep, sloth and error - is declared to be Tamasika.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
That joy is said to be born of tams which, both in the beginning and in the seel, is delusive to oneself and arises from sleep, laziness and inadvertence.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Tamasic happiness is described so that it can be rejected. 'Anubandhe' means after the end. Delusive means causing ignorance. It arises from sleep, indolence, and heedlessness.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
That happiness which both in the beginning and in the end deludes the self, arising from sleep, indolence, and heedlessness, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary: Excessive sleep, procrastination (indolence), and negligence of duty (heedlessness) provide a temporary sense of comfort to a Tamasic person. Heedlessness is both passive (not doing duties) and active (indulging in harmful behaviors like intoxication, dishonesty, etc.). This happiness suppresses wisdom and traps the soul in lower existences (like plants or animals) and leads to hell. It deludes the self throughout, refusing to let discrimination awaken. Thus, seekers of spiritual growth must transcend all three types of happiness to find true liberation.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Pleasure of the Tamasika type causes delusion to the self at the beginning and the end of enjoyment. Here 'delusion' means the absence of knowledge about things as they are. Pleasure springing from sleep, sloth and error are the cause of it. Even at the time of experience, sleep etc., are the cause of delusion. It is clear how sleep causes delusion. 'Sloth' is indolence in sensory operations. When sensory activities are slow, dimness of knowledge results. 'Error' is heedlessness regarding what ought to be done. From this also occurs the dimness of knowledge. Thus, these two also cause delusion. Such pleasure is declared to be Tamasika. Therefore what is meant is this:  subduing Rajas and Tamas, the Sattva alone should be allowed to develop by the aspirant for relase.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.36–18.39 jointly): Explains the threefold classification of happiness. Sattvika joy feels like poison initially during arduous mental discipline, but yields the nectar of liberation in the end through the tranquility of Self-knowledge. Rajasa joy stems from sense-object contact, tasting like nectar at first but ending in sorrow like poison. Tamasa joy is delusive from start to finish, born of sleep, indolence, and negligence.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
That joy is udahrtam, said to be; tamasam, born of tamas; yat, which; both agre, in the beginning; ca, and; anubandhe, in the seel, after the end (of enjoyment); is mohanam, delusive; atmanah, to oneself; and nidra-alasya-pramada-uttham, arises from sleep, laziness and inadvertence.
Therefore, now is begun a verse in order to conclude this section [The section showing that all things in the whole of creation are under the influence of the three gunas.].

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
That happiness which at first and in the end causes delusion to the self, is Tamasic. Therefore, a seeker must subdue Rajas and Tamas and cultivate Sattva.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The happiness which both in the beginning and in the end causes delusion, arising from sleep, indolence, and heedlessness (daydreaming without performing duty), is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The happiness which in the beginning and also in the end causes delusion to the self, arising from sleep, indolence, and heedlessness (absence of attention to one's duty leading to daydreaming), is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The happiness which from beginning to end deludes the self, arising from sleep, indolence, and heedlessness, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Sleep, indolence, and heedlessness obscure the true nature of things. Sleep causes ignorance, indolence causes dullness of senses, and heedlessness causes neglect of duty. The pleasure derived from these is a mere illusion (shukhābhasa) and leads to decay. It should never be accepted.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The happiness which at first and in the end causes delusion (ignorance of one's relation to Me), arising from sleep, indolence, and heedlessness, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The happiness which from beginning to end deludes the self, arising from sleep, indolence, and heedlessness, is declared to be Tamasic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.

 One who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the mode of darkness, ignorance, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to act is also in the mode of ignorance. For the person in the mode of ignorance, everything is illusion. There is no happiness either in the beginning or at the end. For the person in the mode of passion there might be some kind of ephemeral happiness in the beginning and at the end distress, but for the person in the mode of ignorance there is only distress both in the beginning and at the end.