Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yadahaṃkāramāśritya na yotsya iti manyase .
mithyaiṣa vyavasāyaste prakṛtistvāṃ niyokṣyati

Word Meanings:
यत् - if
अहङ्कारम् - egoism
आश्रित्य - having taken refuge in
न - not
योत्स्ये - will fight
इति - thus
मन्यसे - thinkest
मिथ्या - vain
एषः - this
व्यवसायः - resolve
ते - thy
प्रकृतिः - nature
त्वाम् - thee
नियोक्ष्यति - will compel.

Life Application:
If taking refuge in egoism you think 'I will not fight', vain is your resolve; your nature will compel you.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
If, filled with egotism, you think 'I will not fight', vain is this resolve of yours; your nature will compel you.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
If, filled with egoism, thou thinkest: "I will not fight", vain is this, thy resolve; Nature will compel thee.

यत् if? अहङ्कारम् egoism? आश्रित्य having taken refuge in? न not? योत्स्ये (I) will fight? इति thus? मन्यसे (thou) thinkest? मिथ्या vain? एषः this? व्यवसायः resolve? ते thy? प्रकृतिः nature? त्वाम् thee? नियोक्ष्यति will compel.Commentary This strong determination of thy mind will be rendered utterly futile by thy inner nature thy nature will constrain thee thy nature as a warrior will compel thee to fight. It is a mere illusion to say that thou art Arjuna? that these are thy relatives and that to kill them will be a sin.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
If thou in thy vanity thinkest of avoiding this fight, thy will shall not be fulfilled, for Nature herself will compel thee.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Humans often do not pay attention to general statements of truth unless applied to their own life experiences. Therefore, Lord Krishna applies the aforementioned philosophical principle to Arjuna's immediate problem. If Arjuna, due to temporary dispassion or a desire to escape, abstains from fighting, then according to natural laws, his own nature (prakriti) will eventually compel him to act. At that time, he may not even find a suitable field to express his nature and exhaust his desires. Thus, Lord Krishna warns Arjuna that his resolve to avoid fighting is futile.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
In case, holding fast to the sense of ego, you think (decide)   'I shall not fight', that resolve of yours will be just useless.  [For] your own natural condition will incite you  [to fight].

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
If, in your self-conceit, you think, 'I will not fight,' your resolve is in vain. Nature will compel you.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
That you think 'I shall not fight', by relying on egotism,-vain is this determination of yours. (Your) nature impel you!

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Even if you think 'I will not fight', that resolve of yours is vain because your Kshatriya nature, dominated by Rajas, will compel you to fight.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
If, filled with egotism, you think: 'I will not fight', vain is this resolve of yours; your nature will compel you.

Commentary: A person is not independent of his own nature. Arjuna is a Kshatriya by birth and temperament. Even if he tries to escape the war due to temporary emotion, his inherent Kshatriya nature (dominated by energy, courage, and action) will compel him to fight. It is better to perform one's natural duty consciously as an offering to God than to be dragged into it helplessly by nature.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
If, in your 'self-conceit,' i.e., under a false sense of independence that you know what is good for you and what is not - if, not heeding My ?nd, you think, 'I will not fight,' then this resolve based on your sense of independence will be in vain. For Nature will compel you to go against your resolve - you who are ignorant and who adversely react to my sovereignty.

He elucidates the same:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yat, that; manyase, you think, resolve; this-'na yotsye, I shall not fight'; asritya, by relying; on ahankaram, egotism, mithya, vain; is esah, this; vyava-sayah, determination; te, of yours; because prakrtih, nature, your own nature of a Ksatriya; niyoksyati, will impell; ;tvam, you!

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
To explain this, the Lord says: 'yadyad...' If you think 'I will not fight', this resolve of yours is vain (useless). Even then, My external energy (prakriti) or your inherent nature will compel you to act.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Yad': If, relying on egotism (the false pride of thinking 'I am righteous and will not perform this cruel act'), you think 'I will not fight', vain is this resolve of yours, because your nature (the Rajasic quality that initiates the Kshatriya birth) will compel and inspire you to fight.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
If you say, 'Even if I perish, I will not fight with my kinsmen', the Lord replies: 'yad': disregarding My word, if relying solely on egotism, you think: 'I will not fight', vain is this resolve of yours, because you are not independent. Your nature, transformed into Rajas, will surely compel and engage you in war.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
You should not think 'I am independent and will not do what is spoken by another', because you are subservient. 'Yad': if, relying on egotism (the false pride that 'I am independent and will not perform this harmful war'), you think: 'I will not fight', this resolve of yours is vain and born of delusion. Your Kshatriya nature will forcibly compel you into battle.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Thus, the refusal to fight resulting from not listening to My words leads to ruin. Now, the impossibility of avoiding the fight is stated. If you think, 'Let there be Karma-yoga for me, but by adopting some other action instead of this war, I will not perish', the Lord answers: 'yadahaṃkāra...'. Egoism here is the feeling that you know what is good and bad. The result of relying on this egoism is disregarding My command. If My commands are ignored, you will become subservient to nature (prakriti) and will be forced into harmful activities.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover: 'yad': if, relying on egotism (the ignorance that makes you consider killing teachers and others as sinful and irreligious), and by not listening to My words, you resolve: 'I will not fight', futile is this resolve of yours. Why? Because you are subservient to My power. Nature, which is under My control, will compel you and engage you in war despite your refusal. The point is: one who is averse to My command is dominated by material nature (prakriti), while one who acts according to My command is free from its bondage.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
In case you think 'I am independent and will not do as You say', the Lord replies: 'yad': if, relying on pride (egotism), you think 'I will not fight', futile is this resolve of yours. Because your nature (Kshatriya qualities) will compel you. It has also been said: 'Even the wise man acts in accordance with his own nature; beings follow nature; what can restraint do?' (3.33).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you will be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged in warfare.

 Arjuna was a military man, and born of the nature of the kṣatriya. Therefore his natural duty was to fight. But due to false ego he was fearing that by killing his teacher, grandfather and friends he would incur sinful reactions. Actually he was considering himself master of his actions, as if he were directing the good and bad results of such work. He forgot that the Supreme Personality of Godhead was present there, instructing him to fight. That is the forgetfulness of the conditioned soul. The Supreme Personality gives directions as to what is good and what is bad, and one simply has to act in Kṛṣṇa consciousness to attain the perfection of life. No one can ascertain his destiny as the Supreme Lord can; therefore the best course is to take direction from the Supreme Lord and act. No one should neglect the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the order of the spiritual master, who is the representative of God. One should act unhesitatingly to execute the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead – that will keep one safe under all circumstances.