Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
arjuna uvāca .
prakṛtiṃ puruṣaṃ caiva kṣetraṃ kṣetrajñameva ca .
etadveditumicchāmi jñānaṃ jñeyaṃ ca keśava

Word Meanings:
प्रकृतिम् - the Prakriti
पुरुषम् - the Purusha
च - and
एव - even
क्षेत्रम् - the field
क्षेत्रज्ञम् - knower of the field (soul)
एव - even
च - and
एतत् - this
वेदितुम् - to know
इच्छामि - wish
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
ज्ञेयम् - what ought to be
च - and
केशव - O Kesava.

Life Application:
Begin your spiritual and intellectual inquiries by clearly defining key concepts like nature, consciousness, knowledge, and the observer.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Arjuna said – O Kesava! I wish to know Prakriti (nature) and Purusha (the spirit), Kshetra (the field) and Ksetrajna (the knower of the field), as well as Jnana (knowledge) and Jneya (that which ought to be known).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Arjuna said  I wish to learn about Nature (matter) and the Spirit (soul), the field and the knower of the field, knowledge and that which ought to be known, O Kesava.

प्रकृतिम् the Prakriti (matter)? पुरुषम् the Purusha (Spirit or Soul)? च and? एव even? क्षेत्रम् the field? क्षेत्रज्ञम् the knower of the field? एव even? च and? एतत् this? वेदितुम् to know? इच्छामि (I) wish? ज्ञानम् knowledge? ज्ञेयम् what ought to be known? च and? केशव O Kesava.Commentary In some of the books you will not find this verse. If you include this verse also? the number of verses of the Bhagavad Gita will come to 701. Some commentators look upon this verse as an interpolation.We have come to the beginning of the third section of the Gita. Essentially the same knowledge is taught in this section but there are more details.This discourse on Kshetra (matter) is commenced with a view to determine the essential nature of the possessor of the two Prakritis (Natures)? the lower and the higher? described in chapter VII? verses 4 and 5.In the previous discourse a description of the devotee who is dear to the Lord is given from verse 13 to the end. Now the estion arises What sort of knowledge of Truth should he possess The answer is given in this discourse.Nature is composed of the three alities. It transforms itself into the body? senses and the sensual objects to serve the two purposes of the individual soul? viz.? Bhoga (enjoyment) and Apavarga (liberation).The Gita is divided into three sections illustrative of the three words of the Mahavakya or Great Sentence of the Sama Veda -- TatTvamAsi (That thou art). In accordance with this view the first six chapters deal with the path of action or Karma Yoga and the nature of the thou (TvamPada). The next six chapters explain the path of devotion or Bhakti Yoga and the nature of That (TatPada). The last six chapters treat of the path of knowledge or Jnana Yoga and the nature of the middle term art (AsiPada) which establishes the identity of the individual and the Supreme Soul (Jiva Brahma Aikyam).Arjuna now wishes to know in detail the difference between Prakriti and Purusha (Matter and Spirit). He desires to have a discriminative knowledge of the difference between them.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
"Arjuna asked: My Lord! Who is God and what is Nature; what is Matter and what is the Self; what is that they call Wisdom, and what is it that is worth knowing? I wish to have this explained.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
This verse is not found in many manuscripts of the Gita, while in some other manuscripts it is given as Arjuna's inquiry.

Prakriti and Purusha: Sage Kapila, the founder of the Indian Sankhya philosophy, used the two terms Prakriti and Purusha to denote the insentient (matter) and sentient (spirit) principles respectively. The creation was brought forth by the union of these two; Arjuna wishes to know them.

Kshetra and Ksetrajna: The meaning of these two terms has been clarified in the introduction to this chapter.

Jnana and Jneya: In this chapter, the word Jnana refers to that pure mind (antahkarana) through which alone the Truth of the Self can be experienced. This Self alone is Jneya, that is, the object to be known.

It will be beneficial for all seekers to know the answer to this inquiry of Arjuna.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
No such translation is available for this sloka.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
There is no such translation for this sloka.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Swami Gambhirananda has not translated this sloka. Many editions of the Bhagavadgita do not contain this sloka, including the commentary by Sankaracharya. If this sloka is included, the total number of slokas in the Bhagavadgita is 701.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
In the first and middle hexads, the meanings of the terms 'Tvam' and 'Tat' were explained respectively. Now, the final hexad, which is centered on the sentence-meaning (the identity 'Asi') and emphasizes right knowledge, is commenced. Introducing the first chapter of this final hexad (the chapter on Kshetra), Anandagiri recalls the preceding context. Restraining any independent status of the two natures (Prakritis), he notes that the nature consisting of Sattva etc., described as earth etc., is 'Apara' (lower) because it is the cause of worldly existence. The nature described as 'Itas tv anyam' is 'Para' (higher), its superiority stemming from its divine essence. Anandagiri explains that the body is the object seen, while the Self alone is the Knower of the Field (Ksetrajna) and the Seer.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The Blessed Lord said: O son of Kunti (Arjuna), this body is called the 'field' (Kshetra), and he who knows it is called the 'knower of the field' (Ksetrajna) by the wise.

Commentary: 'Idam sariram kaunteya kshetram ity abhidhiyate' - Man refers to physical things like 'this animal', 'this bird', 'this tree' with the sense of 'this' (objectivity). And he refers to this body sometimes as 'I' and sometimes as 'my'. But in reality, the body that is called one's own is also something referred to as 'this'. Whether it is the gross body, the subtle body, or the causal body, all of them are objects referred to as 'this'.

The body made of five elements (earth, water, fire, air, ether) born from parents is the gross body, also called Annamaya Kosha. The subtle body consists of 17 components: five senses of knowledge, five organs of action, five vital airs, mind, and intellect. The causal body is ignorance (Ajnana). All three bodies undergo constant change and destruction. The term Kshetra (field) implies that just as seeds sown in a field yield crops, so do actions done in this body yield fruits of future births.

The living entity (Jiva) knows this body, and wise seers who know the truth of Kshetra and Ksetrajna call this Jiva by the name 'Ksetrajna'. If the Jiva breaks its association with Kshetra, it merges into the Supreme Self.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
No commentary.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Inclusion of this sloka, spoken by Arjuna, brings the total number of slokas in the Bhagavadgita to 701. Many versions of the Bhagavadgita, including the current commentary by Dr. S Sankaranarayan, do not include this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. Many editions of the Bhagavadgita do not contain this sloka৷৷ If this sloka is included, the total number of slokas in the Bhagavadgita is 701.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Having heard the Lord's declaration: 'Those wise ones who worship Me with undivided mind in the manner stated above are dear to Me and I deliver them,' Dhananjaya (Arjuna), overwhelmed with love and desirous of knowing that truth, prayed to the Lord. Thinking how devotion could exist without the knowledge of the true nature of all existence (the world etc.), he inquires about that knowledge starting with 'Prakritim...'. Arjuna says: O Kesava (Giver of liberation even to Brahma and Siva)! For the sake of developing devotion, I wish to know Prakriti (Your own power described earlier), Purusha (the living entity as Your part), Kshetra (the place of all origin), Ksetrajna (the knower of its nature), Jnana (knowledge itself), and Jneya (the object to be attained through that knowledge).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Arjuna said: O Keshava, I wish to understand what is Prakriti (nature), Purusha (the enjoyer), and the field and the knower of the field, and what are knowledge and the object of knowledge.

 Arjuna was inquisitive about prakṛti (nature), puruṣa (the enjoyer), kṣetra (the field), kṣetra-jña (its knower), and knowledge and the object of knowledge. When he inquired about all these, Kṛṣṇa said that this body is called the field and that one who knows this body is called the knower of the field. This body is the field of activity for the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul is entrapped in material existence, and he attempts to lord it over material nature. And so, according to his capacity to dominate material nature, he gets a field of activity. That field of activity is the body. And what is the body? The body is made of senses. The conditioned soul wants to enjoy sense gratification, and, according to his capacity to enjoy sense gratification, he is offered a body, or field of activity. Therefore the body is called kṣetra, or the field of activity for the conditioned soul. Now, the person, who should not identify himself with the body, is called kṣetra-jña, the knower of the field. It is not very difficult to understand the difference between the field and its knower, the body and the knower of the body. Any person can consider that from childhood to old age he undergoes so many changes of body and yet is still one person, remaining. Thus there is a difference between the knower of the field of activities and the actual field of activities. A living conditioned soul can thus understand that he is different from the body. It is described in the beginning – dehino ’smin – that the living entity is within the body and that the body is changing from childhood to boyhood and from boyhood to youth and from youth to old age, and the person who owns the body knows that the body is changing. The owner is distinctly kṣetra-jña. Sometimes we think, “I am happy,” “I am a man,” “I am a woman,” “I am a dog,” “I am a cat.” These are the bodily designations of the knower. But the knower is different from the body. Although we may use many articles – our clothes, etc. – we know that we are different from the things used. Similarly, we also understand by a little contemplation that we are different from the body. I or you or anyone else who owns the body is called kṣetra-jña, the knower of the field of activities, and the body is called kṣetra, the field of activities itself. In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gītā the knower of the body (the living entity) and the position by which he can understand the Supreme Lord are described. In the middle six chapters of the Bhagavad-gītā the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the relationship between the individual soul and the Supersoul in regard to devotional service are described. The superior position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the subordinate position of the individual soul are definitely defined in these chapters. The living entities are subordinate under all circumstances, but in their forgetfulness they are suffering. When enlightened by pious activities, they approach the Supreme Lord in different capacities – as the distressed, those in want of money, the inquisitive, and those in search of knowledge. That is also described. Now, starting with the Thirteenth Chapter, how the living entity comes into contact with material nature and how he is delivered by the Supreme Lord through the different methods of fruitive activities, cultivation of knowledge, and the discharge of devotional service are explained. Although the living entity is completely different from the material body, he somehow becomes related. This also is explained.