Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
bhaktyā māmabhijānāti yāvānyaścāsmi tattvataḥ .
tato māṃ tattvato jñātvā viśate tadanantaram

Word Meanings:
भक्त्या - by devotion
माम् - Me
अभिजानाति - knows
यावान् - what
यः - who
च - and
अस्मि - I am
तत्त्वतः - in truth
ततः - then
माम् - Me
तत्त्वतः - in truth
ज्ञात्वा - having known
विशते - enters
तत् - that
अनन्तरम् - afterwards.

Life Application:
By devotion he knows God in truth, what and who God is; knowing God in truth, he enters God immediately.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
By that devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; then, having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
By devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; then having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into the Supreme.

भक्त्या by devotion? माम् Me? अभिजानाति (he) knows? यावान् what? यः who? च and? अस्मि (I) am? तत्त्वतः in truth? ततः then? माम् Me? तत्त्वतः in truth? ज्ञात्वा having known? विशते (he) enters? तत् that? अनन्तरम् afterwards.Commentary My devotee? O Arjuna? who has attained to union with Me through singleminded and unflinching devotion is verily My very Self. Devotion culminates in knowledge. Devotion begins with two and ends in one. ParaBhakti (supreme devotion) and Jnana are one. Devotion is the mother. Knowledge is the son. By devotion he knows that I am allpervading pure,consciousness he knows that I am nondual? unborn? decayless? causeless? selfluminous? indivisible? unchanging he knows that I am destitute of all the differences caused by the limiting adjuncts he knows that I am the support? source? womb? basis? and substratum of everything he knows that I am the ruler of all beings he knows that I am the Supreme Purusha? the controller of Maya? and that this world is a mere appearance. Thus knowing Me in truth or in essence? he enters into Me soon after attaining Selfknowledge.The act of knowing and the act of entering are not two distinct acts. Knowing is becoming. Knowing is attaining Selfknowledge. To know That is to become That. Entering is knowing or beoming That. Entering is the attainment of Selfknowledge or Selfrealisation. These are all jugglery of words only. Knowing and entering are synonymous terms. It is very difficult to understand or comprehend transcendental spiritual matters. The teachers use various terms or expressions? analogies? similes? parables? stories? etc. to make the aspirant grasp the matter clearly and lucidly. Words are imperfect and languages are defective. They cannot fully express the inner spiritual experiences. The teacher somehow or other expresses to the students or aspirants these spiritual ideas. The aspirant himself will have to realise the Self. That is beyond the reach of words of expressions or analogies of similes. How can there be similes for that nondual Brahman These words are a sort of help or prop for the aspirants to lean upon in the beginning to understand spiritual matters. When he realises the Self? these words are of no value to him. He himself becomes an embodiment of knowledge.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
By such devotion, he sees Me, who I am and what I am; and thus realising the Truth, he enters My Kingdom.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
By devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; then, having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into Me. Commentary: Supreme devotion is complete identification with the Lord. Through this, the devotee understands the Lord's manifested glory (yavan) and His unmanifested, formless absolute essence (yas chasmi). Knowing Him in truth means realizing Him as all-pervading and transcendent. Entering the Lord is not physical but refers to Self-realization, where the devotee's soul merges with the Supreme Consciousness.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Through devotion he comes to know of Me :  Who I am and how, in fact, I am-having correctly  known Me, he enters Me.  Then afterwards,

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Through devotion, he comes to know Me fully - who and what I am in reality, who I am and how I am. Knowing Me thus in truth, he forthwith enters into Me.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Through devotion he knows Me in reality, as to what and who I am. Then, having known Me in truth, he enters (into Me) immediately after that (Knowledge).

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
By devotion (which is the fruit of meditation), he knows Me in essence, that I am the non-dual Self, unborn, free from fear, and pure consciousness. Having thus known Me, there is no difference between him and Me; he enters into Me, which is liberation (Kaivalya).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
By that devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; then, having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into Me.

Commentary: Through supreme love, the seeker becomes completely dedicated to the Lord, and his separate identity vanishes. Even in the state of Brahmabhuta, a subtle trace of ego ('I am Brahman') remains. This is dissolved only through Para Bhakti (devotion). Knowing Him in truth means realizing His all-pervading aspect (yavan) as well as His absolute essence (yas chasmi). Upon this realization, the distinction between devotee and Divine disappears, and he enters into the Supreme Reality.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Through such devotion, he knows 'who I am,' i.e., knows My own essence and My nature, and 'what I am,' i.e., in My attributes and glory. Knowing Me truly, he rises to a higher level than this Bhakti, and aciring knowledge of the truth, enters into Me through devotion. The meaning is that he attains Me by means of infinite and unsurpassed Bhakti which develops subseent in time to the vision of the nature, attributes and glory of the Lord in reality. Here the term 'Tatah' (through) denotes that devotion is the cause of attainment; for it has been stated to be the cause of entrance n the text, 'But by singel-minded devotion it is possible ৷৷.' (11.54).

In this way, the crowning development has been told starting from the disinterested performance of periodical and occasional rites suitable for the various stations and stages of life, which are to be performed to propitiate the Supreme Person. Sri Krsna now explains that even for actions meant for attaining desired objects (Kamya-karmas) the crowning stage is the same as for these described above, provided they too are done not for fulfilling one's desires but as offerings to propitiate the Supreme Person.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Bhaktya, through devotion, through that devotion described as Knowledge; abhijanati, he knows; mam, Me; tattvatah, in reality; as to yavan, what I am, with the extensive differences created by limiting adjuncts; and yah asmi, who I am when all distinctions create by the limiting adjuncts are destroyed-Me who am the supreme Person comparable to space [In points of all-pervasiveness and non-attachment.] and one-without-a-second, absolute, homogeneous Consciousness, birthless, ageless, immortal, fearless and deathless.
Tatah, then; jnatva, having known; mam, Me, thus; tattvatah, in truth; visate, he enters into Me, Myself; tadanantaram, immediately after that (Knowledge). Here, by saing, 'having known, he enters without delay', it is not meant that the acts of 'knowing' and 'entering immediately after' are different. What then? What is meant is the absolute Knowledge itself that has to no other result, [In place of phalantarabhava-jnana-matram eva, Ast. reads 'phalantarbhavat jnanamatram eva, absolute Knowledge itself, since there is no other result'.-Tr.] for it has been said, 'And৷৷.understand Me to be the "Knower of the field", (13.2).
Opponent: Has it not been contradictory to say, he knows Me through that which is the supreme steadliness (nistha) in Knowledge?
Vedantin: If it be asked, How it is contradictory?
Opponent: The answer is: Whenever any Knowledge of something arises in a knower, at that very moment the knower knows that object. Hence, he does not depend on steadfastness in Knowledge which consists in the repetition of the act of knowing. And therefore, it is contradictory to say one knows not through knowledge, but through steadfastness in knowledge which is a repetition of the act of knowing.
Vedantin: There is no such fault, since the culmination of Knowledge-which (Knowledge) is associated with the causes of its unfoldment and maturity, and which has nothing to contradict it- in the conviction that one's own Self has been realized is what is referred to by the word nistha (consummation): When knowledge-which concerns the identity of the 'Knower of the field' and the supreme Self, and which remains associated with the renunciation of all actions that arise from the perception of the distinction among their accessories such as agent etc., and which unfolds from the instruction of the scriptures and teachers, depending on purity of the intellect etc. and humility etc. which are the auxiliary cuases of the origin and maturity of Knowledge-continues in the form of the conviction that one's own Self has been realized, then that continuance is called the supreme steadfastness (nistha) in Knowledge.
This steadfastness in Knowledge that is such has been spoken of as the highest, the fourth kind of devotion in relation to the three other devotions viz of the afflicted, etc. (cf. 7.16). Through that highest devotion one realizes the Lord in truth. Immediately after that the idea of difference between the Lord and the Knower of the field vanishes totally. There-fore the statement, 'one knows Me through devotion in the form of steadfastness in Knowledge', is not contradictory. And, in this sense, all the scriptures-consisting of Vedanta (Upanisads etc.), History, Mythology and Smrtis-, as for instance, 'Knowing (this very Self the Brahmanas) renounce৷৷.and lead a mendicant's life' (Br. 3.5.1), 'Therefore they speak of monasticism as excellent among these austerities' (Ma. Na. 24.1), 'Monasticism verily became supreme' (ibid. 21.2), which enjoin renunciation become meaningful. Thus, monasticism means renunciation of rites and duties. There are also the texts, 'Having renounced the Vedas as well as this world and the next' (Ap. Dh. Su. 2.9.13), and 'Give up religion and irreligion' (Mbh. Sa. 329.40; 331.44), etc. And here (in the Gita) also various relevant) passages have been pointed out. In is not porper that those texts should be meaningless. Nor are they merely eulogistic, since they occur in their own contexts. Besides, Liberation consists in being established in the changeless real nature of the indwelling Self. Indeed, it is not possible that one who wants to go to the eastern sea and the other who wants to go in the opposite direction to the western sea can have the same course!
And steadfastness in Knowledg consists in being totally absorbed in maintaining a current of thought with regard to the indwelling Self. And that is opposed to coexistence with duties, like going to the western sea. It has been the conclusion of those versed in the valid means of knowledge that the difference between them is as wide as that between a mountain and a mustard seed! Therefore it is established that one should have recourse to steadfastness in Knowledge only, by relinishing all rites and duties.
The fruit of the attainment of success from the Yoga of Devotion consisting in worshiping the Lord with one's own actions is the ability to remain steadfast in Knowledge, from which, follows stead-fastness in Knowledge, culminating in the result, Liberation. That Yoga of Devotion to the Lord is now being praised in this concluding section dealing with the purport of the Scripture, with a veiw to generating a firm conviction with regard to it (the purport of the Scripture):

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Knowing Me in truth, he enters Me, which is the dissolution of all sense of separateness.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
By that devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; then, having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into My Supreme Being.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
By that devotion (mature meditation), he knows Me in truth, what (unconditional pure consciousness) and who (the non-dual Self) I am; then, having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into Me, meaning the distinction of knower, knowing and known is dissolved.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
By that devotion he knows Me in truth, how all-pervading and what essence I am; and having known Me in truth, he enters into Me.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
By that devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; and having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into Me.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
By that devotion he knows Me in truth, who I am in My essence and nature, and what I am in My attributes and glory. Having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into Me, which is the attainment of the Supreme.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
By devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; then having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into Me.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
By devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; then having known Me in truth, he forthwith enters into Me.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.

 The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and His plenary portions cannot be understood by mental speculation nor by the nondevotees. If anyone wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he has to take to pure devotional service under the guidance of a pure devotee. Otherwise, the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead will always be hidden. As already stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.25) , nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya: He is not revealed to everyone. No one can understand God simply by erudite scholarship or mental speculation. Only one who is actually engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and devotional service can understand what Kṛṣṇa is. University degrees are not helpful. One who is fully conversant with the Kṛṣṇa science becomes eligible to enter into the spiritual kingdom, the abode of Kṛṣṇa. Becoming Brahman does not mean that one loses his identity. Devotional service is there, and as long as devotional service exists, there must be God, the devotee, and the process of devotional service. Such knowledge is never vanquished, even after liberation. Liberation involves getting free from the concept of material life; in spiritual life the same distinction is there, the same individuality is there, but in pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One should not mistakenly think that the word viśate, “enters into Me,” supports the monist theory that one becomes homogeneous with the impersonal Brahman. No. Viśate means that one can enter into the abode of the Supreme Lord in one’s individuality to engage in His association and render service unto Him. For instance, a green bird enters a green tree not to become one with the tree but to enjoy the fruits of the tree. Impersonalists generally give the example of a river flowing into the ocean and merging. This may be a source of happiness for the impersonalist, but the personalist keeps his personal individuality like an aquatic in the ocean. We find so many living entities within the ocean, if we go deep. Surface acquaintance with the ocean is not sufficient; one must have complete knowledge of the aquatics living in the ocean depths. Because of his pure devotional service, a devotee can understand the transcendental qualities and the opulences of the Supreme Lord in truth. As it is stated in the Eleventh Chapter, only by devotional service can one understand. The same is confirmed here; one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotional service and enter into His kingdom. After attainment of the brahma-bhūta stage of freedom from material conceptions, devotional service begins by one’s hearing about the Lord. When one hears about the Supreme Lord, automatically the brahma-bhūta stage develops, and material contamination – greediness and lust for sense enjoyment – disappears. As lust and desires disappear from the heart of a devotee, he becomes more attached to the service of the Lord, and by such attachment he becomes free from material contamination. In that state of life he can understand the Supreme Lord. This is the statement of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also. After liberation the process of bhakti, or transcendental service, continues. The Vedānta-sūtra (4.1.12) confirms this: ā-prāyaṇāt tatrāpi hi dṛṣṭam. This means that after liberation the process of devotional service continues. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , real devotional liberation is defined as the reinstatement of the living entity in his own identity, his own constitutional position. The constitutional position is already explained: every living entity is a part-and-parcel fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore his constitutional position is to serve. After liberation, this service is never stopped. Actual liberation is getting free from misconceptions of life.