Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
aprakāśo.apravṛttiśca pramādo moha eva ca .
tamasyetāni jāyante vivṛddhe kurunandana

Word Meanings:
अप्रकाशः - darkness
अप्रवृत्तिः - inertness
च - and
प्रमादः - heedlessness
मोहः - delusion
एव - even
च - and
तमसि - in inertia
एतानि - these
जायन्ते - arise
विवृद्धे - have become prdominant
कुरुनन्दन - O descendant of Kuru

Life Application:
When darkness, inactivity, heedlessness, and delusion arise, know that ignorance is predominant.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O descendant of Kuru, when Tamoguna increases, non-illumination, inactivity, heedlessness, and delusion—all these arise.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Darkness, inertness, heedlessness and delusion  these arise when Tamas is predominant, O Arjuna.

अप्रकाशः darkness? अप्रवृत्तिः inertness? च and? प्रमादः heedlessness? मोहः delusion? एव even? च and? तमसि in inertia? एतानि these? जायन्ते arise? विवृद्धे have become prdominant? कुरुनन्दन O descendant of Kuru (Arjuna).Commentary When Tamas increases? darkness? a desire to do nothing? forgetfulness of ones duties and confusion ome into existence.Darkness Absence of discrimination.Apravritti Inertness extreme inactivity.Pramada (heedlessness) and Moha (delusion) are the effects of darkness. These are the characteristics or marks which indicate that Tamas is predominant. Tamas is a great stumbling block to spiritual progress and success in any walk of life. It must be destroyed at all costs. People mistake Tamas for Sattva or Santi (peace). They take the Tamasic man for a silent Yogi All is Prarabdha Everything is Maya There is no world Why should I work Work will bind me. I am Brahman. This is not spirituality but pure and thick Tamas.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Darkness, stagnation, folly and infatuation are the result of the dominance of Ignorance, O joy of the Kuru-clan!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
If a seeker finds in himself the symptoms described in this verse, he should understand that he is afflicted by Tamoguna. Non-illumination (aprakasha) refers to that state of intellect in which it finds itself unable to take any decision. In common language, this state is called dullness or drowsiness, under the influence of which it becomes entirely impossible for human intellect to discriminate between truth and untruth. All of us experience this state daily when we are overcome by sleep at night.

Inactivity (apravritti) denotes the tendency to avoid or run away from all kinds of responsibilities, feeling oneself incapable of performing any task, and a complete lack of effort and enthusiasm to achieve anything in the world. When Tamoguna becomes dominant, all ambitions wane. When man's energy becomes dormant, eating and sleeping remain the only two principal activities of his life.

As a result of all this, he becomes extremely heedless (pramada). He does not even hear the inner call of his soul. And in fact, he cannot even become a tyrant like Ravana, because even to be wicked requires immense enthusiasm and tireless activity.

Uncapable of performing both auspicious and inauspicious deeds, he gradually sinks into the pit of delusion (moha). He evaluates the world erroneously, misinterprets his potential in life, and always makes mistakes in establishing his practical relationships. Thus, a man who understands neither himself, nor the world, nor his relationships—his life is an illusion and his very existence is a grave error.

Thus, after describing the effects of these three gunas on the mind, the Teacher of the Gita wants to make us realize that the influence of these gunas does not exist only while living in a particular body. These tendencies of mind which we generate, develop, and empower by following them in this life, also determine the destiny and state of the jiva (soul) after death.

Except for Vedanta philosophy, no other branch of philosophy has thoroughly considered the subject of life after death. Though there are various explanations given by other religious faiths on this subject, no one disbelieves in the existence of life after death. In other faiths, there are only dogmatic assertions colored by religious prejudice regarding the journey of the soul, but no logical reasoning worthy of being called philosophy.

Earlier in the Gita, rebirth was also discussed in detail. The complete separation of the subtle body from the gross body is called death. Therefore, death is the destiny of the gross body; it is not the tragic end of the eternally existing jiva identified with the subtle body. Having fulfilled its purpose in a particular body, the jiva leaves that body. Mind and intellect in the form of thoughts constitute the subtle body. Even during life in a physical body, the thoughts of the inner instrument determine the nature of a person's actions. Therefore, the conclusion of Hindu thinkers is logical that even after death, the jiva moves in the direction determined by the cumulative result of thoughts in the present life.

When a person transfers, he can go to the bank and withdraw the remaining balance in his account at that time, not the total amount deposited by him in the past. Similarly, the quality and direction of our thoughts at the time of death are determined by the cumulative result of good and bad thoughts and actions performed during life.

We have already seen that the nature of our thoughts is influenced by Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. Therefore, it is entirely logical that the destiny of a man after leaving the body should be determined by whichever guna predominates during his lifetime. In the following section of this chapter, these possibilities are described.

Lord says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Absence of [mental]  illumination, non-excertion, negligence and mere delusion-these are born when the Tamas is on the increase predominantly, O darling of the Kurus !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Non-illumination, inactivity, negligence and even delusion - these arise, O Arjuna, when Tamas prevails.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O descendant of the Kuru dynasty, when tamas predominates these surely [i.e. without exception.-M.S.] come into being: non-discrimination and inactivity, inadvertence and delusion.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He states the characteristics of increased Tamas in the words 'aprakasha' etc. By the two qualifications (non-illumination and inactivity), the complete absence of both knowledge and action is stated. In 'its effect', the word 'tat' indicates the non-discrimination shown. Heedlessness (pramada) has been explained. Delusion (moha) means knowing what is to be known in a contrary manner. He states another form of foolishness of that very delusion: non-discrimination. The sense is that Tamas should be understood as increased through an excess of non-discrimination, etc.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O descendant of Kuru! On the increase of Tamoguna, non-illumination, inactivity, heedlessness, and delusion—these mental modifications are also produced.

Commentary — 
Aprakasah: When Tamoguna increases suppressing the light (clarity) state of Sattvaguna, then there remains no clarity in the senses and inner instrument (mind-intellect). The understanding power in the senses and inner instrument vanishes on the increase of Tamoguna; that is, the past thing is not remembered and new discrimination does not arise. Here, by calling this state 'aprakasha', its opposition to Sattvaguna's modification 'prakasha' is shown.

Apravrittih: When Tamoguna increases suppressing Rajoguna's modification 'pravritti' (activity), then there is no desire to do any work. One feels like sitting or lying down uselessly. There is no interest even in doing necessary work. All this is the function of the modification 'apravritti'.

Pramadah: Engaging in work that ought not to be done and not doing work that ought to be done; and engaging in activities from which there is neither spiritual progress, nor worldly progress, nor any social utility, nor even physical necessity—such as smoking, playing cards/dice, entertainment, etc.—is the work of the modification 'pramada'.

Mohah: When the modification 'moha' comes upon the increase of Tamoguna, anti-discriminative feelings arise within. Discrimination does not work in doing or not doing an action; rather, foolishness prevails, due to which the capacity to perform spiritual and practical work is lost.

Eva cha: By these words, sleeping excessively, wasting one's life's time in vain, wasting money uselessly, and all other useless activities should be included.

Tamasyetani jayante vivriddhe kurunandana: All these are the marks of increased Tamoguna; that is, when aprakasha, apravritti, etc. are seen, it should be understood that Tamoguna has increased by suppressing Sattvaguna and Rajoguna.

Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas—all three gunas being subtle are beyond the senses; that is, they are not objects of the senses and mind. Therefore, these three gunas are not directly visible, and direct knowledge of their nature is not attained. The knowledge or identification of these gunas is attained only through their mental modifications, because modifications being gross become objects of the senses and mind. Therefore, the Lord in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth verses has described the modifications of all three gunas respectively, so that the imperceptible gunas may be identified and the seeker may carefully abandon Rajoguna and Tamoguna to increase Sattvaguna.

Vital Point:
The modifications of all three gunas—Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas—naturally arise, perish, and increase or decrease. All these are changeable. The seeker also experiences the change of these modifications in his life. This proves that the modifications of the three gunas are changing, and no change ever occurs in the person who knows their changes. The modifications of the three gunas are objects of perception (drisya) and the person is the observer (drashta) seeing them. The observer is completely distinct from the observed—this is the rule. The designation 'observer' exists only when there is attention toward the observed object. When attention is not on the observed object, the observer remains without designation. The mistake is that by attributing the observed to oneself, one considers "I am lustful", "I am angry", etc.

Attaching oneself to modifications like lust and anger and considering them in oneself is inviting those modifications and making them permanent. A person out of error considers anger justified at the time it comes and says that it comes to everyone, and at other times maintains the feeling that "my nature is angry". Thus by accepting "I am angry", that anger settles into the ego. Then it becomes difficult to get rid of the modification of anger. This is the reason why a seeker, despite trying, cannot eliminate modifications like anger and accepts defeat from them.

The main and easy way to eliminate modifications like lust and anger is that the seeker should never consider them as his own. In reality, modifications do not remain continuously; rather, the modification-less state remains continuously. Because modifications come and go, but oneself remains eternally immutable. Modifications like anger are not in oneself, but in the mind and intellect. But the seeker, uniting with the mind and intellect, mistakenly considers those modifications in himself. If he does not consider the modifications in himself, the assumed connection with them is severed. Then modifications do not have to be eliminated; rather, they vanish on their own. For example, on the arrival of anger, the seeker should think: "I am that very Self; I can never unite with incoming and outgoing anger." When such thought becomes firm, the force of anger will diminish and it will come less frequently than before, and finally it will be completely eliminated.

The Lord in the preceding three verses respectively describes the symptoms of the increase of Sattvaguna, Rajoguna, and Tamoguna to alert the seeker that only by assuming connection with the gunas, the modifications occurring in the gunas appear to be in oneself; in reality, the seeker has not the slightest connection with them. Gunas and their modifications, being the effects of Prakriti, are changeable, and oneself being a part of the Supreme Soul is unchangeable. Prakriti and Purusha—both are mutually distinct. How can there be identity of the non-changing with the changing? By keeping sight of this reality, Tamoguna and Rajoguna are suppressed and Sattvaguna increases automatically in the seeker. Since there is enjoyment-mentality in Sattvaguna—that is, attachment to the happiness arising from it—this Sattvaguna also creates an obstacle in becoming beyond the gunas. Therefore, the seeker should not enjoy even the happiness born of Sattvaguna. Enjoying sattvic happiness is a part of Rajoguna. When attachment increases in Rajoguna, anger arises toward whatever obstructs attachment, leading to delusion; and when objects are obtained according to attachment, greed arises leading to delusion. Thus, by the birth of delusion, one falls from Rajoguna into Tamoguna and undergoes downfall (Gita 2.62-63).

Connection: What is the fruit of the momentarily increased modifications of the gunas—this is explained in the next two verses.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Non-illumination' is the absence of knowledge. 'Inactivity' is immovableness. 'Negligence' is inadvertence resulting in works that should not be done. 'Delusion' is wrong knowledge. These arise when Tamas waxes strong. By these, one should know that the Tamas has increased very much.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sarva-etc.  upto kurunandana. In all the gates : in all the sense-organs. Greed etc., are born in succession when  the Rajas dominates.  Similarly, absence of mental illumination and so on arise in succession only at the time of the increase of the Tamas.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Kuru-nandana, O descendant of the Kuru dynasty; when the ality of tamas vivrddhe, predominates; etani, these indications; eva, surely; jayante, come into being; extreme aprakasah, non-discrimination; and apravrttih, inactivity; its [i.e. of non-discrimination.] effects, pramadah, in-advertence; and mohah, delusion, i.e. stupidity, which is a from of non-discrimination.
Whatever result is achieved even after death, that is also owing to attachment and desire; every-thing is certainly caused by the alities. By way of showing this the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Aprakasha' etc. Nescience (avidya) is fourfold: total darkness (andhatamisra), darkness (tamisra), great delusion (mahamoha), and delusion (moha). Tamas as the fifth was mentioned first. When ignorance of one's true nature increases, superimpositions of vital force (prana), inner instrument, senses, and physical body take place. This five-limbed nescience itself is spoken of under a different name. That nescience mentioned by Sri Vishnuswami also culminates in this very nescience. Here, nescience is included within Tamoguna and is not stated separately.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Aprakasha' means complete unfitness for knowledge despite the presence of causes of knowledge such as instruction. 'Apravritti' means total incapacity to engage in action despite the presence of causes for action in scriptures like 'one should offer Agnihotra' and despite having understood the scripture. 'Pramada' is the lack of attention toward what is to be performed as duty at that moment. In 'moha eva cha', moha means sleep or erroneous knowledge (viparyaya). Both 'cha' words are for conjunction. The word 'eva' is for excluding deviation. Only when Tamas predominates do these symptoms arise. O descendant of Kuru, therefore, by these invariable marks, one should know Tamas to be increased—this is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore—'aprakasha' etc. Aprakasha means loss of discrimination, apravritti means lack of effort (inactivity), pramada means absence of mindfulness of one's duty, and moha means false attachment/delusion. When Tamas predominates, these indications (marks) come into being. By these marks, one should understand the increase of Tamas—this is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He states the mark of increased Tamas. Aprakasha means absence of discrimination between duty and non-duty. Apravritti means absence of the previously mentioned activity. Pramada has been explained as the effect of non-discrimination. Moha means non-discrimination of what is to be known, i.e., stupidity. The word 'cha' is for combining laziness etc. The word 'eva' is for avoiding deviation. Only when Tamas increases do these marks arise, or only these marks arise. The sense is that Tamas should be known as increased by the excess of aprakasha, etc. Addressing as 'O descendant of Kuru' is to indicate that since you are born in a noble lineage, you ought not to take recourse to the marks of Tamas.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In the verse 'aprakasho apravrittishcha', pramada is non-deliberation even when there is an opportunity for deliberation. Thus, since aprakasha and pramada stand in a general-particular relationship, there is no tautology according to the go-balivarda rule (the rule of specifying general and particular). With this intention, he says: 'Aprakasha is non-arising of knowledge'. Here, the previously mentioned sleep etc. is intended. Apravritti is the previously mentioned laziness, hence 'stabdhta' (immovability/inactivity) is stated. Moha and pramada are also those two.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
To know Tamas, he says—'aprakasha' etc. Aprakasha means non-tranquility/lack of clarity of mind. Apravritti means lack of effort in the service of the Lord and in the company of the Lord's devotees, etc. Pramada means lack of mindfulness in singing the praises/worship of the Lord. Moha means attachment to worldly life. O descendant of Kuru, when Tamas increases, these arise.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Despite the presence of teachers and instructers who impart knowledge, non-arising of knowledge is the non-manifestation of Sattva's effect 'illumination' (aprakasha). Despite the presence of causes for activity, non-arising of action is the non-manifestation of Rajas's effect 'activity' (apravritti). Pramada is the absence of discrimination between what ought to be done and what ought not to be done. Moha is in the form of sleep, laziness, etc.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
When there is an increase in the mode of ignorance, O son of Kuru, darkness, inertia, madness and illusion are manifested.

 When there is no illumination, knowledge is absent. One in the mode of ignorance does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to act whimsically, for no purpose. Even though he has the capacity to work, he makes no endeavor. This is called illusion. Although consciousness is going on, life is inactive. These are the symptoms of one in the mode of ignorance.