Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
antavanta ime dehā nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ .
anāśino.aprameyasya tasmādyudhyasva bhārata

Word Meanings:
अन्तवन्तः - having an end
इमे - these
देहाः - bodies
नित्यस्य - of the everlasting
उक्ताः - are said
शरीरिणः - of the embodied
अनाशिनः - of the indestructible
अप्रमेयस्य - of the immesaurable
तस्मात् - therefore
युध्यस्व - fight
भारत - O Bharata.

Life Application:
Fulfill your daily responsibilities bravely, knowing that physical limitations do not diminish your eternal worth.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
These bodies of the eternal, indestructible, immeasurable embodied Self are all said to have an end. Therefore, O Bharata, fight!

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
These bodies of the embodied Self, Which is eternal, indestructible and immeasurable, are said to have an end. Therefore fight, O Arjuna.

अन्तवन्तः having an end? इमे these? देहाः bodies? नित्यस्य of the everlasting? उक्ताः are said? शरीरिणः of the embodied? अनाशिनः of the indestructible? अप्रमेयस्य of the immesaurable? तस्मात् therefore? युध्यस्व fight? भारत O Bharata.Commentary -- Lord Krishna explains to Arjuna the nature of the allpervading? immortal Self in a variety of ways and thus induces him to fight by removing his delusion? grief and despondency which are born of ignorance.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The material bodies which this Eternal, Indestructible, Immeasurable Spirit inhabits are all finite. Therefore fight, O Valiant Man!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The physical bodies borne by the Self are perishable, while the Self is eternal, indestructible, and aprameya, that is, cannot be known by the intellect. To say here that the Self is eternal and indestructible means that the Self undergoes neither total nor partial destruction.

The eternal Self-principle is called agyeya (unknowable), which does not mean that it is unknown. The sense is this: the Self cannot be known in the manner in which we know objects through the senses. The reason is that the senses, mind and intellect, our instruments of knowledge, are themselves insentient, and can illumine other things only in the presence of the conscious Self. Now, that very consciousness by whose presence the senses and other instruments become capable of grasping objects -- how could that same consciousness be known by them as a direct object? This is altogether impossible, and it is from this standpoint that the Self is here called unknowable. The Self is self-established.

Therefore, O Bharata, fight -- in truth, this sentence does not command everyone to fight. Such a call to war would not be possible in the scriptural texts of a dharma whose very foundation is forgiveness and generous tolerance. If any commentator interprets it so, that is improper, and he is not reading the Gita in the context of the Mahabharata. 'O Bharata, fight' is a call to dharma for every person, that he abandon the tendency toward defeat and face, with steadfastness and courage, every situation that arises in life. Active resistance to adharma -- this is Sri Krishna's central message in the Gita.

Now the Lord goes on to cite two mantras from the Upanishads to establish that the chief purpose of scripture is to remove delusion -- avidya, the root cause of the world. The Lord says: it is your false notion that Bhishma and Drona will be killed by me, and that I shall become their killer... How?

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
These physical bodies that have an end and suffer the peculiar destruction,  are declared to belong to the eternal embodied Soul, Which is destructionless and imcomprehensible.  Therefore fight,  O descendent of Bharata !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
These bodiesof the Jiva (the embodied self) are said to have an end while the Jiva itself is eternal, indestructible and incomprehensibel. Therefore, fight O Bharata (Arjuna).

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
These destructible bodies are said to belong to the everlasting, indestructible, indeterminable, embodied One. Therefore, O descendant of Bharata, join the battle.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
If it be granted that some part of the body too is eternal, he says: no, this is stated in 'antavantah' (having an end). Then let there be destruction of the Self too, as the reflection is destroyed by the destruction of the mirror -- to this he says: 'nityasya sharirinah,' meaning, to distinguish it from the Lord. And this is not even an incidental destruction, he says: 'anashinah.' Why? Because it shares the nature of the immeasurable Lord. A reflection is destroyed only by the destruction of the proximity between the limiting adjunct and the reflected image; but here the Self is itself, being conscious, its own illuminator -- there is no eternal limiting adjunct at all. As the Lord's own words say: 'upon attaining liberation, the individual soul, free of any eternal limiting adjunct, being of the very nature of consciousness, is but the reflection of Keshava himself.'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Both the real and the unreal, being the immediately adjacent natures, have already been determined, in their ultimate essence, to be free of self-contradiction. Now, wishing to determine the unreal yet more precisely, the question is raised: 'kim punah...' Since it has already been settled that 'the unreal is simply unreal,' one might think this question has no scope; but, in order to refute nihilism and determine the intended unreal, this verse has its scope -- this is said, in 'yat svatma...' It is stated that the class of not-Self, namely the body and the rest, is itself the object of the term 'asat' (unreal) here under discussion, in 'uchyate...' Their independence is refuted, in 'nityasya...' The qualifier is given to distinguish the Self from space and the like, in 'sharirinah...' The eternality-through-continuous-flow is denied, in 'anashinah...' It is stated that the Self is not an object of perception and other means of knowledge, in 'aprameyasya...' Since the body and the rest are not real substances, and the Self is uniform, you incur no fault of violence even while engaged in your own dharma in battle -- this is said, in 'tasmat...'

One might object: since the cognition of reality regarding the body and the rest persists continuously and is never interrupted, how can these bodies be said to have an end? He answers, in 'yatha...': in the same way, though these bodies are objects of the cognition of reality, they come to have an end because that cognition is interrupted when finally examined by valid means of knowledge -- this is the remaining sense. That the waking body and the like have an end can be inferred, as generally accepted, from the very fact of being a body, he says, in 'svapne...' Even granting that the body and the rest have an end, one might doubt whether the Self's connection with them, viewed as a continuous stream, is endless; to this he answers, in 'nityasya...'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The bodies of this indestructible, immeasurable, and eternal embodied one are said to have an end. Therefore, O Arjuna, fight.

Explanation -- 'Anashinah' -- that in which no change whatsoever occurs at any time, for any reason, whose diminishment never happens, whose non-being never occurs, is called 'anashi,' that is, indestructible.

'Aprameyasya' -- that which is not an object of valid proof, that is, which is not an object of the inner faculty or the senses, is called 'aprameya.' Where the inner faculty and senses are not the means of valid knowledge, there scripture and saintly great souls alone serve as the means -- and scripture and saints serve as such means only for those who have faith. Whoever has faith in whichever scripture and saint accepts the words of that scripture and saint. Hence this principle is a matter of faith alone, not of proof.

Scripture and saints compel no one to have faith in them. A person is free either to have faith or not. If he has faith in the words of scripture and the saints, then this principle is the object of his faith; and if he does not have faith, then this principle is not the object of his proof.

'Nityasya' -- this is eternal, ever-abiding. It is not that this does not exist at some time; rather, it exists always, at all times.

'Antavanta ime deha uktah sharirinah' -- of this indestructible, immeasurable and eternal embodied one, all the bodies whatsoever in the entire world are said to have an end. To say they 'have an end' means that they are ending at every single moment. There is nothing in them but ending -- only ending, and nothing else...

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The root 'dih' means 'to grow.' Hence these bodies (Dehas) are characterised by complexity. They have an end - their nature is perishablity. For, jugs and such other things which are characterised by complexity are seen to have an end. The bodies of the embodied self, which are made of conglomerated elements, serve the purpose of experiencing the effects of Karmas, as stated in Brh. U. IV. 4.5, 'Auspicious embodiments are got through good actions.' Such bodies perish when Karmas are exhausted. Further the self is imperishable. Why?  Because it is not measurable. Neither can It be conceived as the object of knowledge, but only as the subject (knower). It will be taught later on:  'He who knows It is called the knower of the Field by those who know this (13.1).

Besides, the self is not seen to be made up of many (elements). Because in the perception 'I am the knower' throughout the body, only something other than the body is understood as possessing an invariable form as the knower. Further, this knower cannot be dismembered and seen in different places as is the case with the body. Therefore the self is eternal, for (1) It is not a complex being of a single form; (2) It is the knowing subject; and (3) It pervades all. On the contrary, the body is perishable, because (1) it is complex; (2) it serves the purpose of experiencing the fruits of Karma by the embodied self; (3) it has a plurality of parts and (4) it can be pervaded. Therefore, as the body is by nature perishable and the self by nature is eternal, both are not objects fit for grief. Hence, bearing with courage the inevitable strike of weapons, sharp or hard, liable to be received by you and others, begin the action called war without being attached to the fruits but for the sake of attaining immortality.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
'Yas tattva-darshibhih' -- is that which is seen by the seers of Truth truly eternal or non-eternal? To this doubt he answers, in 'avinashi...': here 'tu' is used in the sense of 'cha' ('and'). And the Self is indeed indestructible.

'Antavantah' etc. -- these bodies, at the time they reach the unobservable stage, undergo their apparent destruction. This would be impossible unless they were continuously undergoing a particular kind of destruction, that is, changing at every moment. For it has been said: 'by observing the withered condition of beings at their last moment, the loss of newness at every moment is inferred.' The same has been said by the sage Vyasa too: 'in every being, at every moment, there is mutual difference among its subtle parts, each serving its own distinct purpose. But owing to its subtlety, this is not clearly grasped' (Mahabharata, Shanti Parva, Moksha-dharma, ch. 308, v. 121). Here, 'having different purposes' means: 'because they perform different acts according to their own respective special purposes.'

Now, the bodies have their end and are ever-changing. The Self, on the other hand, is destructionless, because it is incomprehensible. Changing nature belongs only to the insentient thing, which is comprehensible, but not to what is non-insentient and is exclusively of the nature of consciousness. Because it is not possible for a thing to acquire an altogether different nature from its own. Thus, the bodies meet their end permanently and hence cannot be lamented for; the Self ever remains without destruction and hence need not be lamented for either. Thus a single krtya-suffix has been employed by the sage to convey both senses simultaneously in the expression 'ashochyan.'

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Then what is that unreal thing which abandons its own being, that is, whose state changes? To this he answers: those whose end, that is, destruction, occurs, are 'having an end.' Just as the cognition of the reality of water in a mirage and the like is dispelled upon examination by valid means of knowledge -- and that dispelling is its 'end' -- so too all these bodies have an end, and, like bodies in a dream or in magic, all these bodies too have an end. Hence, of this indestructible, immeasurable, embodied, eternal Self, all these bodies are said by discriminating persons to have an end -- this is the sense.

The two words 'eternal' and 'indestructible' are not repetitive, because eternality and destruction are each of two well-known kinds in the world. As, for instance, a body reduced to ashes and vanished from sight is said to be 'destroyed'; and a body, while still existing, having become transfigured through disease and the like, is also said to be 'destroyed.' Hence the two qualifiers 'indestructible' and 'eternal' convey that this Self has no connection with destruction of either kind. Were this not said, the Self's eternality would be no different from that of earth and the other elements. But that should not be the case, and hence it is called 'indestructible.'

'Aprameyasya' means: 'not an object of valid knowledge, that is, not determinable by such means of knowledge as direct perception.'

Objection: Is the Self not determined by scripture, and prior to that by perception and the like?

Vedantin: No, because the Self is self-evident. For it is only when the Self stands already established as the knower that the knower seeks a means of valid knowledge. It is not that one first fails to know oneself as 'I am such,' and only afterward proceeds to determine an object of knowledge. That which is called the 'self' remains unknown to no one. But scripture is the final authority -- when the Vedic text establishes Brahman as the innermost Self, all such distinctions as knower, known and the means of knowledge become sublated; hence it is reasonable that the Vedic text serves as the final authority. Moreover, its authority derives from its being faultless, in that it has no human origin. By way of merely negating superimposed attributes that do not belong to the Self, scripture attains authority with regard to the Self -- not by way of making something unknown known. There is an Upanishadic text in support of this: '...the Brahman that is immediate and direct, the Self that is within all' (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 3.4.1).

Since the Self is thus eternal and unchanging, therefore fight, that is, do not desist from the war. Here there is no injunction to undertake war as a duty, because he, Arjuna, though resolved for war, has fallen silent, overpowered by grief and delusion. Hence, all that the Lord is doing here is removing the obstruction to his duty. 'Therefore fight' is merely an approval, not an injunction.

The scripture of the Gita is intended for the eradication of grief, delusion and the like, which are the causes of the cycle of birth and death; it is not intended to enjoin action. As evidence of this, the Lord now cites two Vedic verses:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
The impermanence of bodies was already stated earlier -- why then is it stated again? He answers, in 'bhavatu tu...' To state the counter-position to the inference of the Self's eternality, showing that the very reason intended by the objector is also accepted by the proponent, the objector asks: 'could not some part of the body too be eternal?' -- and the answer given is 'no.' The qualifier 'some' is used to avoid the fault of stating an already-established point.

One might ask why this does not lead to overextension, since the qualifier 'some' would then become pointless. Why is the Self's eternality stated yet again? He answers, in 'astu...' Having thus made even the proponent accept the impermanence of the body, the objector then raises the counter-position: 'let the Self too, being the reflection whose limiting adjunct is the body, be destroyed upon the body's destruction, just as the reflection of a face is destroyed by the destruction of the mirror' -- and this verse is stated to refute that. By this, the underlying sentence-sense 'even so, the Self is eternal' is conveyed. Since there is no purpose in mere repetition, the sense is: those bodies which are impermanent are not the limiting adjunct (of the Self); whatever is the limiting adjunct is not impermanent. This is what is meant by the word 'ime' (these).

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
He now summarizes all that has been said: 'antavantah...' Of this eternal embodied being, all these bodies have an end, are impermanent, and are said to be unstable amid grief whether earned or unearned. In scripture, that which has an end is distinguished from the conscious Self, which is indestructible, since it is aprameya, that is, ungraspable -- therefore, fight.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
One might object: how can that reality which is of the nature of manifestation-itself be indestructible, since manifestation is a property of the body, and the body perishes at every moment? -- so say the materialists who hold that consciousness belongs to the elements themselves. Refuting them, the commentary elaborates the earlier statement 'the unreal has no being.' All these bodies -- gross, subtle, and causal, called Virat, Sutra and Avyakrita, in both their cosmic and individual forms -- being subject to growth and decay, are called 'sharira' (body); and, through the relation of superimposition with the one eternal, indestructible Self, they are said, by scripture and the teachers of Brahman, to be 'sharirin,' that is, embodied, in the sense of being the object seen and enjoyed. As in the Taittiriya Upanishad, positing the five sheaths from the food-sheath up to the bliss-sheath, their substratum, the unconstructed 'tail of Brahman,' is called the foundation.

The gross, compounded elements and their effect, Virat (the gross cosmic totality, the food-sheath), and the subtle, uncompounded elements and their effect, Hiranyagarbha (the subtle cosmic totality, the vital-air, mind, and intellect sheaths) -- thus this entire world, the substrate of name, form and action, being impermanent, has an end. But the substrate of all these, the witness, the self-luminous Self, is eternal and indestructible, since it is unlimited, self-luminous, and, being the illuminator of all modifications, is itself free of modification -- just as the sun, though the illuminator of the entire world, is untouched by external faults. Hence, knowing this distinction between body and Self, even one engaged in battle according to his own dharma incurs no fault of violence and the like.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He shows the attribute of coming and going, in 'antavantah...': those whose end, that is, destruction, occurs, are 'having an end.' These bodies, characterized by pleasure, pain and the rest, belong to the Self, which is ever uniform, embodied, and hence indestructible, that is, free of destruction, and immeasurable, that is, unlimited -- so the seers of Truth have declared them (to have an end). Since the Self thus neither undergoes destruction nor has any real connection with pleasure and pain, abandon the grief born of delusion and fight. Do not forsake your own dharma -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
On the inquiry, 'then what is that unreal?', he says: 'antavantah...' One might object: how can the real, which is of the nature of manifestation, be indestructible, since manifestation is a property of the body, and the body perishes at every moment -- so say the materialists. Refuting them, he elaborates the statement 'the unreal has no being.' With the intent that the discrimination between body and Self was already stated earlier, beginning with 'na tv eva aham...,' the teachers hold that it is not introduced afresh here.

Those in which sublation occurs through knowledge of the truth are 'antavantah' (having an end). Just as the illusion of silver and the like is sublated by knowledge of the shell, so too these illusorily-perceived gross and other bodies belong, through the relation of superimposition, to the eternal, unsublatable Self possessed of causal-body and the rest -- this statement also serves to represent cold and other such causally-conditioned things. The plural is used owing to the multiplicity of bodies. Anticipating the doubt of mere conventional eternality, as of earth and the like, he says: 'anashinah...' The learned have declared it eternal in the ultimate sense, since it is aprameya, that is, without form and the like, since no pervasion can be grasped for it, since nothing similar to it can be examined, and since it cannot be limited by perception and other means of knowledge. Or, a means of knowledge is sought only for what is unknown, whereas the Self is known by all beings as distinct from the body -- as seen in the recognition, 'the very I who experienced my parents in childhood now experiences my grandchildren.'

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
To establish this portion of the claim made in 'na asatah...' he brings down this next verse: 'dehanam...' Deriving the word 'deha' (body) from the root 'dih,' meaning 'to grow,' he establishes that the body, being subject to increase and decrease, having parts, is by nature perishable. In the word 'antavantah' (having an end), 'anta' does not mean a mere determination of extent relative to observation or place, but rather the absence of eternal continuity. Both scripture and inference from the resulting circumstance establish the perishable nature of the body. The body, being a composite of many elements, is impermanent for this reason too. 'Perishing upon exhaustion of karma' follows directly from the very etymology of the word 'sharira' (body) -- for that which wastes away is properly called 'sharira.' Since the bodies of the Lord and the like are not subject to karma, the word 'ime' (these) is used precisely to exclude them.

Having thus established the body's impermanence, and anticipating the counter-position regarding the Self's eternality, the Lord goes on: if it were held that the Self too, being like a reflection whose limiting adjunct is the body, is destroyed along with the body's destruction, just as a reflection is destroyed with the destruction of a mirror -- to refute this, the four qualifiers 'nityasya, sharirinah, anashinah, aprameyasya' are given. The qualifier 'aprameyasya' is not impossible but rather serves to show the unproven nature of the opponent's reason -- this Self is not the reflection of any pot or the like, but of the Lord Himself, and He is immeasurable and all-pervading; how then could the proximity of His limiting adjunct ever be destroyed?

The non-destruction of all three -- the limiting adjunct, the reflected image, and their proximity -- is thus established here. By the word 'nityasya,' it is shown that of the Self's two kinds of limiting adjunct -- the eternal (its own essential, conscious nature) and the non-eternal (the body and the rest) -- only the non-eternal adjunct ceases at liberation, not the eternal one. Hence, with both the body's impermanence and the Self's eternality thus firmly established, O Bharata, Arjuna, fight.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
One might ask what kind of destruction of the body and the like this is, which comes within direct experience. He answers, in 'antavantah...': of the eternal, birthless and deathless embodied one, that is, the individual soul, these worldly, visible bodies -- arising from the desire for individual existence, connected with maya -- of Bhishma and all the rest, are said to 'have an end,' that is, to be subject to termination -- this is the sense. But the bodies connected with the Lord, belonging to the indestructible, imperishable, immeasurable -- that is, unmeasurable by even a thousand means -- embodied Lord Himself, do not have an end -- this is the sense. If it were said that all bodies whatsoever have an end, this would contradict what was said earlier; hence, precisely to convey this distinction, the Lord says 'ime' (these). Hence there is no possibility of sin in slaying these -- therefore fight, that is, continue to wage war. The vocative 'Bharata' is used to inspire confidence in this very statement, since only one born in a noble lineage has such faith in the Lord's word thus spoken.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Having thus stated the eternality of the real Self and the impermanence of the unreal body and the rest, and summarizing this, he now impels Arjuna toward battle, in 'antavantah...': although the statement 'the unreal has no being' means, from the standpoint of ultimate reality, that the unreal bodies have no existence in any of the three times, still, for one who has not attained that vision, and who is gripped by fear of hell and the like, it is stated, from the standpoint of ordinary experience and with the eternal-non-eternal distinction in mind, that bodies have an end -- this is no defect. Eternality means being unlimited by time, and this too belongs, in ordinary usage, even to space -- hence it is said, 'anashinah' (indestructible). Destruction means disappearance, and this too occurs even to space, according to the traditional saying, 'space dissolves into the Self.' But this (the Self) is not so, hence 'anashi,' that is, it is ever self-luminous -- this is the sense.

This too is not visible like a pot and the like, he says, in 'aprameyasya...' Scripture too declares the Self's immeasurability: 'this is immeasurable, constant.' 'Aprameya' means precisely this. This is known only because no means of valid knowledge can reach the Self. Scripture also says: 'by what means could one know that knower by which all this is known, O beloved?' Its being well-established rests solely on its being the inmost Self, per the scripture 'that Brahman which is immediate and direct, the Self within all.' It is also said: 'valid knowledge, invalid knowledge, and the semblance of valid knowledge -- all these are established by whose grace; how could there be any doubt regarding that one?' Therefore, O Bharata, fight. Of the bodies of Bhishma and the rest...

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal living entity is sure to come to an end; therefore, fight, O descendant of Bharata.

 The material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately, or it may do so after a hundred years. It is a question of time only. There is no chance of maintaining it indefinitely. But the spirit soul is so minute that it cannot even be seen by an enemy, to say nothing of being killed. As mentioned in the previous verse, it is so small that no one can have any idea how to measure its dimension. So from both viewpoints there is no cause of lamentation, because the living entity as he is cannot be killed nor can the material body be saved for any length of time or permanently protected. The minute particle of the whole spirit acquires this material body according to his work, and therefore observance of religious principles should be utilized. In the Vedānta-sūtras the living entity is qualified as light because he is part and parcel of the supreme light. As sunlight maintains the entire universe, so the light of the soul maintains this material body. As soon as the spirit soul is out of this material body, the body begins to decompose; therefore it is the spirit soul which maintains this body. The body itself is unimportant. Arjuna was advised to fight and not sacrifice the cause of religion for material, bodily considerations.