Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
lelihyase grasamānaḥ samantāl- lokānsamagrānvadanairjvaladbhiḥ .
tejobhirāpūrya jagatsamagraṃ bhāsastavogrāḥ pratapanti viṣṇo

Word Meanings:
लेलिह्यसे - You lick
ग्रसमानः - devouring
समन्तात् - on every side
लोकान् - the worlds
समग्रान् - all
वदनैः - with mouths
ज्वलद्भिः - flaming
तेजोभिः - with radiance
आपूर्य - filling
जगत् - the world
समग्रम् - the whole
भासः - rays
तव - Thy
उग्राः - fierce
प्रतपन्ति - are burning
विष्णो - O Vishnu

Life Application:
Behold time devouring all worlds from every side, filling the entire universe with radiant and fierce light.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Vishnu! Devouring all these worlds with Your flaming mouths, You are licking them up. Your fierce light, filling the entire universe with effulgence, is scorching it.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Thou lickest up, devouring all the worlds on every side with Thy flaming mouths. Thy fierce rays, filling the whole world with radiance, are burning, O Vishnu!

लेलिह्यसे (Thou) lickest? ग्रसमानः devouring? समन्तात् on every side? लोकान् the worlds? समग्रान् all? वदनैः with mouths? ज्वलद्भिः flaming? तेजोभिः with radiance? आपूर्य filling? जगत् the world? समग्रम् the whole? भासः rays? तव Thy? उग्राः fierce? प्रतपन्ति are burning? विष्णो O VishnuCommentary Vishnu means allpervading? Vyapanasila.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Thou seemest to swallow up the worlds, to lap them in flame. Thy glory fills the universe. Thy fierce rays beat down upon it irresistibly.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
After composing a few verses on the great wave of emotion, Vyasa resumes his former subject. All the creatures of the world are entering the mouth of Time and being destroyed. The hunger of this Time-element is never to be satisfied. Swallowing up all the worlds, You are tasting them.
Actually, this verse explains the principle behind the three creators of creation, sustenance, and destruction. Although we conceive of these three differently, in reality, these three are merely three aspects of one and the same process. We have already seen in detail that the fundamental secret of omnipresent existence is creative destruction.
In a cinema hall, a reel of different pictures is run in front of a beam of light. A picture that is removed from the screen can be called 'dead', and one that appears before it can be considered 'born'. Due to this continuous stream of birth and death, an illusion of a continuous story is created on the screen. Conditioned by space and time, objects, living beings, events, and situations come into our experience and pass away, and the continuity of this coming and going is what we call existence or life.
The above-mentioned thought is expressed in the Puranas in the language of the traditional Trinity—Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahesh (Shiva).
From the perspective of this knowledge, when Arjuna sees that luminous, brilliant cosmic form, he is almost blinded by the fierce light of that Virat.
Because You are of a fierce form, therefore—

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Devouring, on all sides with Your blazing mouths, the entire worlds, You are licking up;  Your terrible rays scroch the entire universe filling it with their radiance, O Visnu !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Devouring all the worlds on every side with your flaming mouths, You lick them up. Your fiery rays, filling the whole universe with their radiance, scorch it, O Visnu.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
You lick Your lips while devouring all the creatures from every side with flaming mouths which are completely filling the entire world with heat.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having shown the manner in which the kings desirous of fighting enter the mouth of the Lord, [the commentator] explains the mode of activity of the Lord and His rays in that state with the words, 'You again' (tvam punah). Having explained the activity of the Lord, he reveals the activity of His rays with the word 'Moreover' (kiñca).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Devouring all the worlds on every side with Your flaming mouths, You are licking them up again and again; and O Vishnu, Your fierce rays, filling the whole universe with radiance, are scorching everyone.

Commentary—'lelihyase grasamanaḥ samantal-lokan samagran vadanairjvaladbhiḥ'—You are destroying all living beings, and lest anyone escape here or there, You are devouring them by repeatedly drawing them into Your flaming mouths with Your tongue. The implication is that no creature can escape the sweep of the tongue of the Lord in the form of Time.

'tejobhirapūrya jagatsamagraṃ bhasastavograḥ pratapanti viṣṇo'—The effulgence of the Lord in His cosmic form is extremely fierce. That fierce effulgence, filling the entire universe, is scorching and distressing everyone.

Connection—The Lord in His cosmic form kept displaying His various extraordinary forms. Seeing all living beings and the warriors of both sides entering into the mouths of His terrible and extremely fierce form, Arjuna became very frightened. Therefore, in order to know the real identity of the Lord of such an extremely fierce form, Arjuna asks a question.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Devouring all these kings with Your flaming mouths, You lick them up, namely, lick up again and again in great anger. Your lips etc., are wet with their blood. Your fiery rays scorch the universe by the brilliant flow of radiance filling the whole universe.

You have manifested Yourself in this terrible form for revealing Your limitless sovereignty as reested by me thus:  'Reveal Yourself to me completely'(11.4), so that I may realise Your limitless sovereignty.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O Visnu, Your fierce rays are acorching. [M.S., S., and S.S. construe 'completely৷৷.heat' to alify 'fierce rays' in the second sentence. However, the use of kim ca (moreover) in the Comm. suggests the translation as above.-Tr.]
Lelihyase, You lick Your lips, You taste; grasamanah, while devouring, while taking in; samagran, all; lokan, the creatures; samantat, from all sides; jvaladbhih, with flaming; vadanaih, mouths; which are apurya, completely filling; samagram, the whole- together (saha) with the foremost (agrena); jagat, world; tejobhih, with heat. Moreover, O Visnu, the all-pervading One, tava, Your; ugrah, fierce; bhasah, rays; are pratapanti, scorching.
Since You are of such a terrible nature, therefore-

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
You lick them up. O Vishnu, the all-pervading One, the rest is clear.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Having stated the manner of entry of the kings desirous of fighting into the mouth of the Lord, he now describes the mode of activity of the Lord and of His rays at that time: 'lelihyase' etc. Thus, devouring (i.e. causing to enter within) all the worlds (i.e. all the people like Duryodhana and others entering with speed), You are licking them up (i.e. tasting them) from all sides with Your flaming mouths. 'Filling the entire world with Your radiance'; because You fill the world with Your light, therefore Your fierce (i.e. intense) rays (i.e. splendours), like a blazing fire, are scorching (i.e. generating heat/distress). O Vishnu, the all-pervading One.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
'What happens next?' To this, he says, 'lelihyase' etc. Devouring, i.e., swallowing all these worlds, i.e., all these warriors, You are licking them up, i.e., eating them excessively from all sides with Your flaming mouths. Moreover, O Vishnu, Your rays (i.e. splendours), pervading the entire world with their fiery flashes, being fierce (i.e. intense), are burning (i.e. causing distress).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
All are entering Your mouths for their own destruction. You, on the other hand, devouring (i.e. causing to enter within) all the worlds from all sides with Your flaming mouths, are licking them up (i.e. tasting them). Moreover, Your fierce (i.e. extremely cruel) rays (i.e. splendours), filling (i.e. pervading) the entire world with radiance, are burning (i.e. generating heat). Since You are all-pervading, therefore those rays also are of the same nature; to indicate this, he addresses You as, 'O Vishnu'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
'Is the Lord completely inactive in destruction, such that it was said they themselves are rushing [into Your mouths]?' The answer to this is given in this verse, 'lelihyase' etc. The cause of destruction is the specific actions of those individual conscious beings, but the Lord, characterized by anger arising from those conditions, performs the destruction. This is the import. 'Hosts of kings' is to be understood as before. 'All (samagran)' means those gathered for battle. In 'You lick (lelihyase)', to manifest the bodily expression of the desire to destroy, it is described as 'due to the intensity of anger'. The expression 'with their blood' etc., refers to what is naturally established by devouring and licking. Since the intensive suffix (yan) is used to denote repetition of action (kriya-samabhihara), meaning repeatedly or intensely, he says, 'repeated licking'. To avoid the doubt of redundancy between the words 'bhas' and 'tejas', they are explained as 'rays' and 'with their own light' respectively. 'Entire (samagram)' means all. 'Scorching (pratapanti)' means causing deep distress; the idea is that they are cooking them for the purpose of swallowing. Or, the significance is that it is unbearable even for onlookers like Brahma.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
'If the Lord does not destroy, then what is the point of their entry?' To this, he says, 'lelihyase' etc. Devouring (i.e. swallowing) all the worlds from all sides with Your blazing mouths, You lick them up (i.e. eat them). The idea is that Your desire for their destruction is also clearly visible. Why would the Lord do so? To this, he addresses: 'O Vishnu, the protector of all, it is only for the protection of the virtuous (sattvikas)'. Your fierce (i.e. capable of burning) rays (i.e. beams), filling the entire world with effulgence (i.e. flashing splendor), are burning (i.e. causing distress). The import here is: Vishnu is the presiding deity of Sattva; only for the protection of the virtuous does He destroy the wicked, therefore doing so is indeed appropriate.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'And those who are falling, You, though compassionate, do not stop them; rather, You indeed desire to devour them.' To explain this, he says, 'lelihyase', meaning You taste them repeatedly or excessively. 'What are You like?' Devouring all the worlds with mouths blazing on all sides. 'Even though You are thus merciless, Your splendor is not diminished; rather, it only increases.' To show this, he says, 'tejobhih' (with effulgence). O Vishnu, the all-pervading One, filling the entire world with effulgence, Your fierce (i.e. untouchable/unbearable) rays (i.e. lights) are burning. This is the syntax. The meaning of the words is clear.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O Viṣṇu, I see You devouring all people from all sides with Your flaming mouths. Covering all the universe with Your effulgence, You are manifest with terrible, scorching rays.

There is no purport for this verse