Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
svabhāvajena kaunteya nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā .
kartuṃ necchasi yanmohātkariṣyasyavaśopi tat

Word Meanings:
स्वभावजेन - born of own nature
कौन्तेय - O son of Kunti
निबद्धः - bound
स्वेन - own
कर्मणा - by action
कर्तुम् - to do
न - not
इच्छसि - wishest
यत् - which
मोहात् - from delusion
करिष्यसि - shalt do
अवशः - helpless
अपि - also
तत् - that.

Life Application:
Bound by your own action born of nature, what from delusion you wish not to do, you will do helplessly.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Bound by your own duty born of your nature, O Kaunteya, that which from delusion you do not wish to do, you shall do even against your will.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
O Arjuna, bound by thy own Karma (action) born of thy own nature, that which from delusion thou wishest not to do, even that thou shalt do helplessly.

स्वभावजेन born of (thy) own nature? कौन्तेय O son of Kunti? निबद्धः bound? स्वेन (thy) own? कर्मणा by action? कर्तुम् to do? न not? इच्छसि (thou) wishest? यत् which? मोहात् from delusion? करिष्यसि (thou) shalt do? अवशः helpless? अपि also? तत् that.Commentary Thou art endowed? O Arjuna? with martial alities? prowess? valour? skill? etc. Thou art? therefore? bound by these innate alities. Thou wilt be forced to fight by thy own nature. Nature will constrain thee to fight? much against thy will.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
O Arjuna! Thy duty binds thee. From thine own nature has it arisen, and that which in thy delusion thou desire not to do, that very thing thou shalt do. Thou art helpless.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In short, Lord Krishna's point is: 'I am not forcing you to fight out of lack of sympathy, but because there is no other way left for you. You have no choice. Although you stubbornly claim you will not fight, this is only your delusion and confusion. You will have to fight because your nature will compel you.' The Lord repeatedly advises to remember Him. How should we remember God? What should be our relationship with Him? These questions of an earnest seeker are answered in the next verse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O son of Kunti !  Being bound fully by your own  duty, born of your own nature, and also being [hence] not independent, you would perform what you do not wish to perform, because of your-delusion.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
O Arjuna, bound by your own duty born out of your own inner disposition, and having no control over your own will, you will be compelled to do that very thing which you now desire not to do through delusion.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Being bound by your own duty born of nature, O son of Kunti, you, being helpless, will verily do that which you do not wish to do owing to indiscrimination.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Bound by your own natural duties (such as heroism, courage, etc., which are born of your past karma), you will helplessly perform even that warfare which you do not wish to perform due to delusion.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Bound by your own duty born of your nature, O Kaunteya, that which from delusion you do not wish to do, you shall do even against your will.

Commentary: Delusion (moha) is temporary and makes a person forget his real nature. Arjuna's wish to withdraw from battle is born of temporary grief and attachment (delusion). However, his deeper, inherent nature as a warrior (Kshatriya) is active. When the war begins, his natural qualities of courage and intolerance of injustice will force him to take up arms. Thus, he will act helplessly under the influence of nature. It is much wiser to obey the Lord's instructions directly and perform one's duties in Krsna consciousness.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
For, heroism is the duty of a Ksatriya born of his nature. Impelled by your own duty of heroism born of your own nature, you will lose self-control when you get the taunts of your enemies. Unable to suffer it, you will be compelled to engage them in battle, which, now, out of delusion and ignorance, you do not desire to do.

All beings have been ordained by Me to follow their Prakrti acired by their previous Karmas. Listen about it:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And because of nibaddhah, being securely bound; svena, by your own; karmana, duty; svabhavajena, born of nature [Svabhava means those tendencies which are created by good bad actions performed in previous births, and which become the cause of performance of duties, renunciation, experience of happiness, sorrow, etc. in the present birth.-S.]-herosim etc. as stated (in 43); O son of Kunti, you avasah, being helpless, under another's control; karisyasi api, will verily do; tat, that duty; yat, which duty; you na, do not; icchasi, wish; kartum, to do; mohat, owing to indiscrimination.
For,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Lord explains this further: 'svabhāvajena...'. This is an explanation of the meaning discussed in the second and third chapters. Bound by the Kshatriya duty born of your material nature, you will helplessly perform it.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The Lord explains nature: 'svabhāvajena...'. Bound and controlled, O Kaunteya, by your own inherent Kshatriya nature such as heroism, which is not accidental but natural, that war (which involves killing relatives) which due to delusion (and the illusion 'I am independent and will act as I wish') you do not wish to perform, you will helplessly, even against your will, perform because you are subservient to your natural tendencies and to the Supreme Lord.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover—'svabhāva...': nature is the cause of being a Kshatriya, which is the impression of past actions (karma-samskara). Bound and controlled by your own duty such as heroism born of that nature, that action in the form of war which from delusion you do not wish to perform, you will helplessly perform even against your will.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The Lord explains subservience to nature: bound (firmly tied) by your own duty born of your nature, such as the previously described heroism, that which from delusion (lack of discrimination) you do not wish to perform, you will helplessly, under the control of another, perform. Since this is so, the Lord addresses him as 'Kaunteya' (son of Kunti), indicating that for a jewel among Kshatriyas, who is also related to Us, turning away from war is not proper.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The Lord shows the manner in which nature prompts actions. What was referred to as 'prakṛti' is here called 'svabhāva' (inherent nature). Heroism, courage, etc., are inherent Kshatriya traits. The desire and tendency towards these traits, born of past impressions (vasanas), bind you. The word 'api' (even) in 'avaso'pi' (even helplessly) indicates that you will perform it. If you refuse to listen to My words, you will be controlled by nature and act accordingly. Delusion (moha) here refers to the ignorance which prevents you from understanding My teaching.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover—'svabhāvajena...': O Kaunteya, the object of My affection! Bound and controlled by your own Kshatriya duty like heroism born of your nature (which arises from My divine play), that war which from delusion you do not wish to perform, you will perform helplessly. Therefore, perform it according to My command. The idea is: one who is averse to My command is dominated and directed by material nature (prakriti), whereas one who acts in accordance with My command is not bound by nature.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The Lord explains the statement 'Nature will compel you': 'svabhāvajena...'. Bound by your own inherent nature such as heroism, you will helplessly perform it under the control of nature.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction. But, compelled by the work born of your own nature, you will act all the same, O son of Kuntī.

 If one refuses to act under the direction of the Supreme Lord, then he is compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone is under the spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature and is acting in that way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself under the direction of the Supreme Lord becomes glorious.