Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
samaduḥkhasukhaḥ svasthaḥ samaloṣṭāśmakāñcanaḥ .
tulyapriyāpriyo dhīrastulyanindātmasaṃstutiḥ

Word Meanings:
समदुःखसुखः - alike in pleasure and
स्वस्थः - standing in his own
समलोष्टाश्मकाञ्चनः - regarding clay, stone and gold as equal
तुल्यप्रियाप्रियः - equally disposed to pleasant and unpleasant
धीरः - firm
तुल्यनिन्दात्मसंस्तुतिः - the same in censure

Life Application:
Balanced in pleasure and pain, self-abiding, regarding clod, stone, gold equal, same to pleasant and unpleasant, firm, balanced in praise/blame...

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He who is established in the Self, remains balanced in pleasure and pain, and looks upon a lump of earth, stone, and gold with an equal eye; such a wise person regards the agreeable and disagreeable, as well as censure and self-praise, as equal.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Who is the same in pleasure and pain, who dwells in the Self, to whom a clod of earth, stone and gold are alike, who is the same to the dear and the unfriendly, who is firm, and to whom censure and praise are as one.

समदुःखसुखः alike in pleasure and pain? स्वस्थः standing in his own Self? समलोष्टाश्मकाञ्चनः regarding a clod of earth? a stone and gold alike? तुल्यप्रियाप्रियः the same to the dear and the undear? धीरः firm? तुल्यनिन्दात्मसंस्तुतिः the same in censure and praise. Commentary Night and day have no meaning to a post fixed in the ground. Even so pleasure and pain have no meaning to a sage who dwells in his own Self. He is above the pairs of opposites. In his eyes cowdung or gold? a jewel or a stone? are of eal value. He is free from the idea of,giving and taking. His mind is not perturbed by anything pleasant or unpleasant. He is the same towards agreeable and disagreeable things. Praise and censure cannot affect him. He stands adamant. He abides in his own essential state as ExistenceKnowledgeBliss Absolute. He is ever calm and serene. (Cf.V.18)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Who accepts pain and pleasure as it comes, is centred in his Self, to whom a piece of clay or stone or gold are the same, who neither likes nor dislikes, who is steadfast, indifferent alike to praise or censure;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The equanimity and balance of mind of a wise person in the ever-changing circumstances of life is described in this verse. Established in the Self beyond the cruelties of the three gunas, the wise person abides where there is neither the thrilling pleasure of Sattva, nor the clamour of Rajas, nor the exhaustion of Tamas. He is of the nature of Existence-Knowledge-Bliss. To an ordinary man, this state of equanimity will appear as total death. And indeed, this is the reality: it is the death of the limited ego, which is the enjoyer of worldly experiences. The conditioned Self appears as the individual soul (jiva), which constantly behaves like a piece of wood floating on the surface of the ocean, tossed by the powerful turbulent waves of a disturbed mind. Constantly agitated by the storms of love and hatred, attraction and repulsion, this miserable jiva suffers countless agitations and sorrows. Therefore, detaching oneself from this chaotic realm of craving and attachment and being established in one's own Self is liberation. What is the relationship of the wise person with the world? This question is just like asking: what is the relationship of a awakened person with his dream world? A person liberated from the bonds of the three gunas completely relinquishes the ignorance-born sense of 'I' and 'mine' with regard to the non-Self objects of the world. In that real divine state of awakening, lower-level experiences, the pleasures and pains of this world, the agreeable and disagreeable, and censure and praise lose all meaning. In all experiences, he remains an equal, unattached witness.

Svasthah: One established in one's own nature of Existence-Knowledge-Bliss, free from all conditionings, is called svasthah. Hence, he remains untouched by the world experienced through conditionings.

Samaduhkhasukhah: Coming into contact with the external world through the senses, evaluating it in comparison with past experiences, and subsequently experiencing it as pleasure or pain is the device of our individual mind. If pleasure or pain were inherent in the objects of the external world, everyone's experience would be identical, just as everyone's experience of sunlight is uniform because light is the nature of the sun. But this is not observed with sense objects. A particular object appears pleasurable to one person and painful to another. This proves that our pleasures and pains are mere imaginations of the mind, not the objective reality. The wise person does not look at the world through the spectacles of the mind and intellect, and therefore remains equal in what worldly people call pleasure and pain.

Samalostasmacancanah: He regards a clod of earth (losta), stone (asma), and gold (kancana) with an equal eye. Worldly people are extremely interested in acquiring objects. They wish to collect valuable items like gold, diamonds, pearls, etc., while ignoring common dirt, stones, etc. But one who has attained the Supreme Reality, that wise person beholds dirt, stone, and gold all as equal, because from the standpoint of Paramarthika Truth, all these are mere unreal appearances. In truth, none of them is valuable.

In childhood, little children collect peacock feathers, shells, marble pieces, broken bangles, old stamps, etc., and for them it is like a precious treasure. But upon reaching youth, that collection holds no importance for them. They hand it over to their younger brother, who becomes overjoyed to receive that treasure. Similarly, an ignorant person in the state of jiva desires to collect innumerable objects, which in the view of the wise is a mere children's game.

Tulyapriyapriyah: If we consider our relationships with various people, we find that a person of similar temperament seems agreeable (priya) to us, and one of contrary temperament disagreeable (apriya). The same holds true for objects and situations. This experience of agreeable and disagreeable belongs only to people living at the level of the mind, not to the wise person established in the Self beyond the mind. In the world, from an ordinary perspective, certain objects and events are considered agreeable or disagreeable. For the wise person, they are all equal, because he does not look at the world by the yardstick of ordinary people.

Tulyanindatmasamstutih: In a dream, some people censure the dreamer and some praise him. When he awakens from the dream, will he not regard that censure and praise as equal? Worldly people, according to their own intellect and understanding, sometimes censure someone and sometimes praise. For a person established in the supreme Self-knowledge, both hold no significance.

Through these four beautiful examples of experiences, Vyasa has illustrated some major life experiences in which an ordinary man experiences pleasure and pain. He further says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
To whom pain, pleasure and sleep are alike; to whom a cold, a stone and a lump of gold are alike; to whom both the pleasant and the unpleasant things are eal; who is firm [in mind]; to whom blame and personal commendation are eal;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who is alike in pleasure and pain, who dwells in his self, who looks upon a clod, a stone and piece of gold as of eal value, who remains the same towards things dear and hateful and who is intelligent, who regards both blame and praise of himself as eal;

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
He to whom sorrow and happiness are alike, who is established in his own Self, to whom a lump of earth, iron and gold are the same, to whom the agreeable and the disagreeable are the same, who is wise, to whom censure and his own praise are the same;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The meaning of equality (tulyatva) has already been stated earlier.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He mentions another characteristic of the person who has transcended the gunas—'Moreover' etc. The equality of the two (pleasure and pain) means not giving rise to attachment and aversion and not being a seat of the egoistic sense of 'mine'. 'Tranquillity' (prasannatva) means non-deviation from one's own Self, i.e., remaining immutable. Although in the view of the wise person, the existence of the agreeable and disagreeable is impossible, relying on the worldly perspective, he says—'pleasant and...' etc. Even though gold etc. are already included under the terms agreeable and disagreeable, they are mentioned separately according to the maxim of the Brahmana and the itinerant monk (brahmana-parivrajaka-nyaya). Censure means pointing out faults, and self-praise means chanting one's own virtues.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
That steadfast man who remains equal in pleasure and pain and is established in his own Self; who remains equal towards a clod of earth, stone, and gold; who remains equal towards the agreeable and disagreeable, and in censure and praise of himself; who remains equal in honor and dishonor, and towards the sides of friend and foe; who has renounced all initiative of actions—that man is said to have transcended the gunas.

Commentary:
Dhirah, samaduhkhasukhah: By knowing the truth of the eternal and non-eternal, the essential and non-essential, and being established in the self-existent nature, the person who has transcended the gunas is called steadfast (dhirah). Favorable and unfavorable circumstances arriving according to past deeds are named pleasure and pain. That is, circumstances agreeable to the body and senses according to destiny are called pleasure, and circumstances disagreeable to the body and senses are called pain. The person who has transcended the gunas remains equal in both. The purport is that external circumstances in the form of pleasure and pain cannot produce modifications in his mind; they cannot make him happy or miserable.

Svasthah: In the true Self, there is no pleasure or pain at all. Pleasure and pain are merely illuminated by the Self. Therefore, the person who has transcended the gunas does not become the enjoyer/sufferer of incoming and outgoing pleasure and pain, but remains firmly established in his eternal, ever-present Self.

Samalostasmacancanah: In a clod of earth, stone, and gold, he has neither attraction (attachment) nor repulsion (aversion). But in practice, he keeps the clod of earth in its place, the stone in its place, and gold in its place (in a safe, etc.). The purport is that although their gain or non-gain does not cause him joy or sorrow, and he remains equal, he nevertheless deals with them appropriately according to context. Not knowing the difference between dirt, stone, and gold is not called equanimity. Equanimity is that even while having knowledge of all three, there is no attachment or aversion towards them. Knowledge is never at fault; modifications alone are at fault.

Tulyapriyapriyah: He remains equal also in the success or non-success of actions being performed, i.e., in the attainment or non-attainment of their immediate fruits.

Tulyanindatmasamstutih: In censure and praise, the name is primary. The person who has transcended the gunas has no connection with the name; therefore, if someone censures him, there is no dejection in his mind, and if someone praises him, there is no delight in his mind. Similarly, he has no hatred towards those who censure him and no attachment towards those who praise him.

It becomes a common habit among ordinary people that censure feels bad to them and praise feels good. But those who rise above the gunas have knowledge of censure and praise and behave appropriately with everyone, yet there is no dejection or delight in them regarding censure or praise. The reason is that in the Truth in which they are established, praise and censure made by others involving gunas do not reach at all.

Censure and praise—both are actions done by others. Being pleased or displeased by those actions is a mistake. The reason is that as is one's nature and conception, so he speaks. He must speak favorably to us, he must not censure us—this is not justice; that is, the feeling of compelling someone to speak is not justice, it is injustice. What right do we have over others to demand that they must not censure us and must only praise us? Secondly, if someone censures, the seeker should be pleased that 'by this my sins are being cut away, I am becoming purified.' If someone praises us, our merits are destroyed by it. Therefore, one should not be pleased with praise, because there is danger in being pleased.

Manapamanayostulyah: In honor and dishonor, the body is primary. The person who has transcended the gunas has no identification with the body. Therefore, whether someone respects or disrespects him, honors or dishonors him, these actions done by others have no effect on him. In both these actions done by others—censure/praise and honor/dishonor—the person who has transcended the gunas remains equal. Having knowledge of these two actions done by others is not faulty; rather, being grieved by censure and dishonor and being delighted by praise and honor is faulty, because both of these are modifications of nature. The person who has transcended the gunas does have knowledge of censure/praise and honor/dishonor, but due to disconnection from the gunas and lack of identification with name and body, he does not become happy or miserable. Because in the Truth in which he is established, these modifications do not exist. That Truth is attribute-less and immutable.

Tulyo mitraripaksayoh: He remains equal towards the sides of friend and foe. Although in the view of the person who has transcended the gunas there is no friend or foe, other people according to their feelings may consider him their friend or foe. Ordinary people also can be considered friends or foes by others, but upon knowing this, it affects them, producing attachment or aversion. But upon knowing this, it has no effect on the person who has transcended the gunas. In fact, due to the feeling of friend and foe alone, partiality occurs in behavior. In the mind of the person who has transcended the gunas, there is no feeling of friend or foe at all; hence there is no partiality in his behavior.

One person maintains friendship with that great soul and another person out of his nature maintains enmity with him. When an occasion arises to deliver justice regarding some matter of those two persons, then (in practice) he takes the side of the inimical person slightly more than the friendly person. For example, while dividing objects, he gives less to the friend (only as much as he can happily bear) and gives somewhat more to the enemy. This also is called equanimity, because there should be justice with one's own side and generosity with the opposing side.

Sarvarambhaparityagi: That great soul is the renouncer of all initiative of actions. The purport is that for the accumulation of wealth/property and pleasures, he does not initiate any new action of any kind. His engagement and disengagement occur only according to spontaneously presented circumstances; that is, his engagement in actions is free from desire, craving, and sense of 'mine', and disengagement is free from desire for honor, praise, etc.

Gunatitah sa ucyate: Here the word 'ucyate' (is said to be) indicates that the great soul does not have a label 'gunatita', but considering the characteristics of the body and mind associated with him, he is called gunatita. In reality, if seen, he who has transcended the gunas cannot have characteristics. Characteristics belong to the gunas alone; therefore, how can one who has characteristics be gunatita? But Arjuna also asked about the characteristics of one who has transcended the gunas, and the Lord also stated the characteristics of one who has transcended the gunas. The purport is that people attribute to him the characteristics of the body and mind in which they previously considered that gunatita person to be situated, saying 'this is a gunatita man'. Therefore, these characteristics are mere indicators to recognize a gunatita person.

The gunas are the effects of nature (Prakriti), and body, senses, mind, and intellect are the effects of the gunas. Therefore, through mind and intellect, even their cause, the gunas, cannot be fully described; then how can Nature, the cause of the gunas, be described at all? That which is completely beyond Nature (gunatita)—describing it through mind and intellect is simply impossible. In truth, these characteristics of gunatita do not exist in the Self at all, but upon the destruction of assumed ego and mineness in the mind, through the medium of that mind, these characteristics are called the characteristics of gunatita.

Here the Lord has mentioned four pairs of opposing terms—pleasure/pain, agreeable/disagreeable, censure/praise, and honor/dishonor—in which ordinary men naturally fall into inequality, and even seekers sometimes fall into inequality. For one who attains equanimity in these eight difficult spots, it becomes easy to maintain equanimity in all other states. Therefore, mentioning these eight difficult spots by name, the Lord shows that a great soul who has transcended the gunas has spontaneous, natural equanimity in all eight spots.

The self-existent immutability of the person who has transcended the gunas, his natural state—incoming and outgoing favorable and unfavorable circumstances do not affect it at all. His immutability and equanimity remain steadfast as they are. His peace is never broken.
[In these two verses, twenty-four and twenty-five, the Lord has described the equanimity of the great soul who has transcended the gunas.]

Connection: Arjuna had asked as the third question the means to transcend the gunas. The Lord answers that in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
He who is 'alike in pleasure and pain,' namely, whose mind is eal in pleasure and pain; 'who dwells in his self,' namely, who dwells in his self because his love for the self keeps his mind in eanimity in pleasure and pain arising from the birth, death etc., of his sons and other relatives and friends, and who, because of this, 'looks upon a clod, a stone and a piece of gold as of eal value,' who conseently remains the same towards things dear or hateful, i.e., who treats alike the worldly objects desired and undesired; who is 'intelligent,' namely, proficient in discrimination between the Prakrti and the self; who, therefore, regards blame and praise as alike, namely, who treats with eality praise and blame looking upon good and evil alities as born of identification with bodies such as those of men etc., and as such unconnected with his real self; who is the 'same in honour and dishonour' because these are feelings based on the misconception that the body is the self, and as a conseence of such discrimination between the body and the self, 'looks alike on friend and foe,' because he understands that ther is no connection between them and himself; and who has thus abandoned all entrprises in which embodied beings are involved - he who is like this, is said to have risen above the Gunas.

Now Sri Krsna states the main method (technie) for transcending such Gunas:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 14.23–14.25 jointly): Udasinavad etc. upto ucyate. He, who is ignorant i.e.,  he who does not distinguish  [even the existence and nonexistence of the Strands] - he alone is wise, because of his correct  knowledge.  That is why he is not shaken i.e., he does not fall from his own nature.  The means in this regard is the firm conviction :  'The exertion that  [in found in my body etc.] is nothing but the innate nature of the body, the sense-organs etc.; and I am unconcerned with any fruit  [of any action]'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Moreover, sama-duhkha-sukhah, he to whom sorrow and happiness are alike;svasthah, who is established in his own Self, tranil; sama-losta-asma-kancanah, to whom a lump of earth, iron and gold are the same; tulya-priya-apriyah, to whom the agreeable and the disagreeable are the same; dhirah, who is wise; tulya-ninda-atma-samstutih, to whom, to which monk, censure and his own praise are the same-.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
In order to dispel the misconception that the phrase 'sama-duhkha-sukhah' (14.24) etc. denotes absolute equality of mind in pleasure and pain under all circumstances, he explains—'tulyatva' etc. The meaning is that the word expressing equality has a specific sense here, in accordance with the previously mentioned manner ('mostly all' etc.).

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Sama...' etc. Having stated that he is recognized by being free from joy and hatred regarding the effects of the gunas, He reminds us of the essential teaching of Sankhya and Yoga, namely that equanimity (samatva) is the cause of yoga. He for whom sorrow and happiness, which are the products of rajas and sattva respectively, are equal. The reason for this is given—'svasthah', meaning established in one's own Self. He for whom a lump of earth, stone, and gold are equal as being equally fit to be discarded, who is equal-minded towards everything.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He to whom sorrow and happiness are equal due to being free from hatred and attachment, due to their being characteristics of the non-Self, and due to their unreal nature, is 'sama-duhkha-sukhah' (alike in sorrow and happiness). Why is it so? Because he is 'svasthah', i.e., established in his own Self, being devoid of the perception of duality. Therefore, he for whom a lump of earth, stone, and gold are equal, being free from the sense of discardability or acceptability, is as such. 'Losta' means a lump of clay. Therefore, he for whom agreeable and disagreeable things, which are instruments of happiness and sorrow, are equal because of the absence of division into beneficial and harmful. He is 'dhirah', i.e., wise. Therefore, he for whom censure and self-praise are equal due to the absence of egoistic identification with oneself.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover—'Sama...' etc. He to whom happiness and sorrow are equal. Because he is established in his own essential nature (Self). Therefore, he for whom a lump of earth, a stone, and gold are equal. He for whom agreeable and disagreeable things, which are the causes of happiness and sorrow, are equal. Who is wise (dhirah). He to whom censure and self-praise are equal.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Moreover, he to whom sorrow and happiness are equal because they do not give rise to attachment and aversion and are not the basis of the sense of 'mine', is 'sama-duhkha-sukhah'. He is established in his own immutable Self and never strays from his true nature. He for whom a lump of earth, etc. are equal, being neither to be discarded nor accepted; he for whom the agreeable and disagreeable are equal, is wise (dhirah). Therefore, he to whom censure and self-praise are equal is said to have transcended the gunas—such is the connection with the next verse.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Equanimity in pleasure and pain, etc., has been well taught earlier. Explaining the word 'svasthah' merely as absence of modification or non-subjection to the gunas would be tautological; but positing firm devotion to the Self serves as the foundational reason for demonstrating manifold mental equanimity—with this intention he says 'established in one's own Self'. He clarifies its purport: 'by virtue of having love exclusively for one's own Self'. Although words like pleasure and pain, agreeable and disagreeable do not differ significantly in meaning, they assume various forms owing to differences in worldly usage. They are 'equal' because of the equality of being discarded, etc. He states equanimity from the standpoint of the pure Self, regardless of praise, etc., arising from non-self attributes, virtue, or defect in material things—'in the Self' etc. 'Samstuti' means complete praising or glorification.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover, he to whom sorrow and happiness, which are of the nature of separation and union, or of the form of worldly and divine bodies, are equal, is 'sama-duhkha-sukhah'. 'Svasthah' means established in My (Lord's) divine nature. Therefore, he for whom a lump of earth, stone, and gold are equal; since everything is of the nature of the Lord, he is such. He for whom the agreeable and disagreeable, which consist of union and separation, are equal. Since the will of the Lord alone is supreme, both are equal to him. 'Dhirah' means capable of enduring sharp pain arising from separation, etc. He to whom censure and self-praise are equal. The inner import is: even censure made by the wicked is almost like praise for a devotee.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Now he describes the eminent knower of Brahman (brahmavid-vara) who is established in the fifth stage of knowledge named 'Asansakti' (non-attachment)—'Sama...' etc. He to whom sorrow and happiness are equal in samadhi is 'sama-duhkha-sukhah'. 'Svasthah' means one who remains by himself according to his own desire. The idea is that when there is no desire to remain in samadhi, he himself emerges (vyutthana) from it. Even in the state of emergence from samadhi, he is 'sama-losta-asma-kancanah', meaning dispassionate (virakta). He remains equal when meeting with agreeable and disagreeable things, as well as censure and praise, being free from joy and sorrow. The reason for this is stated as 'dhirah' (wise/steadfast). Just as a brave warrior, even when suffering pain from severe blows, does not become bewildered due to courage and endures the pain, similarly this wise person, even when experiencing joy and sorrow, does not deviate due to steadfastness. For a wise person of the previous stage, even if pain arises, joy etc. do not arise at all; and for one of the stage prior to that, there is no perception of pain at all—this is the distinction. By these three verses, the characteristics of all jivanmuktas in samadhi (which are internally experienced) and their external behaviors (perceivable by others) have been stated.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The wise person who is equipoised in both happiness and distress, who is tolerant, free from envy, and who is steady in both success and failure, is certainly eligible for liberation.

 Arjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them one after another. In these verses, Kṛṣṇa first indicates that a person transcendentally situated has no envy and does not hanker for anything. When a living entity stays in this material world embodied by the material body, it is to be understood that he is under the control of one of the three modes of material nature. When he is actually out of the body, then he is out of the clutches of the material modes of nature. But as long as he is not out of the material body, he should be neutral. He should engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord so that his identity with the material body will automatically be forgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he acts only for sense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to Kṛṣṇa, sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need this material body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of the material body. The qualities of the material modes in the body will act, but as spirit soul the self is aloof from such activities. How does he become aloof? He does not desire to enjoy the body, nor does he desire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally situated, the devotee becomes automatically free. He need not try to become free from the influence of the modes of material nature. The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situated person. The materially situated person is affected by so-called honor and dishonor offered to the body, but the transcendentally situated person is not affected by such false honor and dishonor. He performs his duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and does not mind whether a man honors or dishonors him. He accepts things that are favorable for his duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, otherwise he has no necessity of anything material, either a stone or gold. He takes everyone as his dear friend who helps him in his execution of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and he does not hate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything on an equal level because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing to do with material existence. Social and political issues do not affect him, because he knows the situation of temporary upheavals and disturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He can attempt anything for Kṛṣṇa, but for his personal self he does not attempt anything. By such behavior one becomes actually transcendentally situated.