Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
na caitadvidmaḥ kataranno garīyo yadvā jayema yadi vā no jayeyuḥ .
yāneva hatvā na jijīviṣāmaḥ te.avasthitāḥ pramukhe dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ

Word Meanings:
न - not
च - and
एतत् - this
विद्मः - know
कतरत् - which
नः - for us
गरीयः - better
यत् - that
वा - or
जयेम - we should conquer
यदि - if
वा - or
नः - us
जयेयुः - they should conquer
यान् - whom
एव - even
हत्वा - having slain
न - not
जिजीविषामः - we wish to live
ते - those
अवस्थिताः - standing
प्रमुखे - in face
धार्तराष्ट्राः - sons of Dhritarashtra.

Life Application:
When moral confusion leaves you undecided between two difficult choices, seek clarity beyond your immediate personal preferences.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
We do not know which is better for us — whether we should conquer them, or they conquer us. Those very sons of Dhritarashtra, having slain whom we would not wish to live, stand arrayed before us for battle.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
I can hardly tell which will be better, that we should  coner them or that they should coner us. Even the sons of Dhritarashtra, after slaying whom we do not wish to live, stand facing us.

न not? च and? एतत् this? विद्मः (we) know? कतरत् which? नः for us? गरीयः better? यत् that? वा or? जयेम we should coner? यदि if? वा or? नः us? जयेयुः they should coner? यान् whom? एव even? हत्वा having slain? न not? जिजीविषामः we wish to live? ते those? अवस्थिताः (are) standing? प्रमुखे in face? धार्तराष्ट्राः sons of Dhritarashtra.No commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Nor can I say whether it were better that they conquer me or for me to conquer them, since would no longer care to live if I killed these sons of Dhritarashtra, now preparing for fight.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The previous two verses no doubt indicate the agitation and confused state of Arjuna's mind. This verse shows that the effect of Arjuna's mental confusion has now spread even to his discriminative intellect. On seeing the army of enemies, a problem arose in his mind for whose resolution he needed the guidance of the intellect's discriminative power; but on account of ego and excessive anxiety over the outcome of the battle, his mind had become disconnected from his intellect. It is for this very reason that a deep chasm had opened up between Arjuna's mind and intellect.

Like a skilled office clerk, our mind gathers various matters through the sense organs and presents them in an organized form before the intellect for decision. The intellect, on the basis of its past experience, renders a verdict, which the mind then expresses in the outer world through the organs of action. This entire process goes on at every moment of our waking state.

Where the functioning of these instruments is not smooth and coordinated -- like an organized team or group of individuals -- that person becomes inwardly disordered and is unable to successfully face the situations that arise in life. When, through knowledge, the coordination between mind and intellect is restored, that very person becomes capable of performing his tasks skillfully once again.

Arjuna's decision-making faculty was not affected by external circumstances but rather, due to his own mental agitation, he found himself unable to render any decision at all. He could not determine whether he should be victorious in the battle or whether the Kauravas should win. Vyasa shows here that the effect of this delusion had fallen not merely upon Arjuna's mind but upon his intellect as well.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Whether we should coner [in the battle],  or they  should coner us-we do not know this viz.,  'which [of  those two] is better for us'.  [For],  having killed whom, we would not wish to live at all,  the same persons stand before us as Dhrtarastra's men.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
We do not know, which of the two is better for us - whether our vanishing them, or their vanishing us. The very sons of Dhrtarastra, whom, if we slay, we should not wish to live, even they are standing in array against us.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
We do not know this as well as to which is the better for us, (and) whether we shall win, or whether they shall coner us. Those very sons of Dhrtarastra, by killing whom we do not wish to live, stand in confrontation.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
One might object: since fighting is the Kshatriya's own dharma, battle alone would be the true good -- anticipating this, he says, in 'Na chaitad...': this too we do not know -- between alms and battle, which is truly better for us: is alms better, since free of violence, or is battle better, being one's own proper duty? And the outcome of victory too is uncertain: will it be a mere standoff between the two sides, or shall we indeed prevail, or shall the sons of Dhritarashtra, Duryodhana and the rest, prevail over us? Even should victory occur, it would bear no true fruit. For those very kinsmen, having slain whom we would have no wish to live, stand arrayed there before us -- the offspring of Dhritarashtra. Hence it is not established that battle is superior to alms, is the sense.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
We also do not know which of the two -- fighting or not fighting -- is truly better for us; nor do we know whether we shall conquer them, or they shall conquer us. Those very kinsmen of Dhritarashtra, having slain whom we would not even wish to live, stand arrayed before us.

Explanation: 'Na chaitad vidmah kataran no gariyah' -- I am unable to decide between these two courses, whether to fight or not to fight. For in Your view, fighting alone is proper; but in my view, since slaying my elders is sinful, not fighting alone is proper. Weighing these two positions, I am unable to determine which is truly the better course for me. Thus, in these words, Arjuna shows that the Lord's position and his own position have now become equally weighted in his mind.

'Yadva jayema yadi va no jayeyuh' -- even if I were to fight according to Your command, we do not know whether we shall conquer them, or whether they (Duryodhana and the rest) shall conquer us. Here Arjuna's doubt is not a lack of confidence in his own strength, but a lack of certainty about the future; for who can know what the future holds?

'Yan eva hatva na jijivishamah' -- we have no desire even to live after slaying our own kinsmen; the question of enjoying pleasures, of ruling a kingdom, is far more remote still! For if our kinsmen are slain, what should we do by living on? Having destroyed our own family with our own hands, we would only sit and grieve! We have no wish to live merely to grieve and to suffer the sorrow of separation.

'Te avasthitah pramukhe dhartarashtrah' -- those very kinsmen of Dhritarashtra, having slain whom we would not even wish to live, stand arrayed before us. All of Dhritarashtra's kinsmen are, after all, our own kinsmen too. Shame upon our living, having slain those very kinsmen!

Transition: finding himself unable to determine his own duty, Arjuna now, in distress, turns in prayer to the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Thus, having begun the battle, one might argue: 'the sons of Dhritarashtra, ceasing their hostile activity, will nonetheless be slain violently by us' -- so be it; but since we, not knowing what is dharma and what is adharma, would gain victory through their slaying, and that victory would itself be unrighteous, it seems to me that being slain by them is actually the better course. Having said this, Arjuna, exceedingly humbled, approached the lotus feet of the Lord, saying: tell me, Your surrendered disciple, what is truly good for me, as You have ascertained it.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Continuing His rebuke through terms such as 'impotence' and the rest, and showing that this is 'a false conviction of righteousness in what is actually unrighteous,' and so on, He introduces Arjuna's reply, in 'Katham...': through 'How shall I, in battle, fight against Bhishma and Drona' and the rest, and through 'should I then enjoy those pleasures,' Arjuna, in his opening argument (purvapaksha), signals as objectionable both a fixation on the particular nature of the act and a fixation on the particular nature of its fruit. Through 'we do not know this' he likewise states a fixation on the particular nature of the act. Action undertaken without any such fixation is simply not possible. Nor does one engage in battle intending defeat. Yet even victory here would be nothing but calamity for us. Hence he says: without slaying our elders, it would be better even to live by begging alms. And this itself cannot be resolved -- whether we should desire victory or desire defeat -- since even in victory there is the destruction of our own kinsmen.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Three verses beginning with 'Na chaitad...' pose a question. Their meaning is self-evident.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
One might object: since alms are forbidden to a Kshatriya, and battle is enjoined, battle alone, being one's own proper dharma, would be the true good for you -- anticipating this, he says: this too we do not know -- between alms and battle, which is truly better for us: is alms better, being free of violence, or is battle better, being one's own dharma? This too we do not know. Even should battle be undertaken, we do not know whether we shall prevail, or whether the sons of Dhritarashtra shall prevail over us. The case of an equal standoff between the two should also be understood as implied. Moreover, even should victory occur, it would in effect be nothing but defeat for us, since those very kinsmen, having slain whom we would have no wish even to live -- let alone to enjoy the objects of pleasure -- stand arrayed there before us: the kinsmen of Dhritarashtra, Bhishma, Drona and all the rest. Hence it is not established that battle is superior to alms, is the sense.

Thus, through the preceding portion of the text, having established the qualifications of the aspirant through an exposition of the faults of worldly existence, it may be noted: in 'na cha shreyo'nu pashyami hatva svajanam ahave' (1.31), by the statement equating one slain in battle with a wandering renunciant in terms of the attainment of spiritual welfare, the goal called liberation, established by scriptural statements such as 'one thing is the good, another is the pleasant,' has been introduced; and by implication, the discernment of the eternal and non-eternal, that all else besides that goal is not the true good, has been indicated. In 'na kankshe vijayam krishna' (1.32), dispassion toward worldly fruits is shown; in 'api trailokya-rajyasya hetoh' (1.35), dispassion toward fruits in the next world; in 'narake niyatam vasah' (1.44), the Self as distinct from the gross body; in 'kim no rajyena' (1.32) as explained, tranquility; in 'kim bhogaih' (1.32), self-restraint; in 'yadyapyete na pashyanti' (1.38), freedom from greed; and in 'tan me kshemataram bhavet' (1.45), forbearance -- thus the purport of the first chapter is shown to be an indication of the means to renunciation. In this present chapter, in 'shreyo bhoktum bhaikshyam api' (2.5), renunciation, characterized by the practice of begging alms, is set forth.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover, even if we were to accept unrighteousness, it is not known whether victory or defeat would be ours -- he says this, in 'Na cha...': of these two, which is truly the greater for us, we do not know. He shows these two alternatives: whether we shall conquer them, or whether they shall conquer us. Moreover, even our own victory would, in its ultimate fruit, be nothing but defeat -- he says this: those very ones, having slain whom we would have no wish to live, stand arrayed there before us.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
One might object: since it is settled that not slaying is truly the good, why then do you grieve? Anticipating this, he says, in 'Na...': we do not know this -- whether alms is truly better for us, being free of violence, or whether battle is better, being one's own dharma. This alone we do not know, this alone is not certain for us. One might further object: if the two sides are of equal strength, why then do you not simply accept battle? Anticipating this, he says: but by my own reasoning, I see fault in this -- in 'Yadva...': we do not know whether we shall conquer them, or whether they shall conquer us. Even should victory be ours, he says there is fault, in 'Yan...': those very sons of Dhritarashtra, kinsmen of Dhritarashtra, having slain whom we would have no wish to live, stand arrayed there before us.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
On 'Na chaitad vidmah' and the rest, he states the intended purport, preceded by the doubt indicated by the word 'cha,' in 'Evam...': it is implied that you, fearing the destruction of your kinsmen, would in fact be causing the destruction of your very closest kinsmen -- Dharmaraja, Bhima, Nakula and the rest -- through your own hesitation. Following the plural form used in 'vidmah' and the rest, he says 'asmakam' (of us): by this word 'asmakam,' it is implied that all are equally disciples, in relation to Bhishma, Drona and the rest who have been designated as fit to be slain. Through the first and second halves of the verse, two doubts reflecting his own preferred positions are indicated. The words 'yadva' and 'yadi va' carry the same sense. The construction of 'yan eva...' and the rest is: those very persons by whose slaying our own life would become undesirable, they themselves, desiring to slay us, stand arrayed there in a manner corresponding to their own slaying [of us]. Through 'na jijivishamah' (we do not wish to live), he expresses the state of mind, culminating in indecision, that is the very cause of his questioning, in 'iti me pratibhati' (thus it appears to me). He then clarifies the qualities of the disciple that render him fit for instruction, as conveyed by the resultant sense of 'yach chhreyah' and the rest, in 'yan mahyam...': the word 'iti' serves the purpose of drawing out a definite conclusion. For a disciple is one who is to be instructed; hence he says, 'I am your disciple; instruct me.' Here, his innate temperament is steadfastness; or, owing to his lack of knowledge regarding the particulars of duty, or owing to his lack of any means to dispel his grief, there is excessive humility. Some say that not abandoning what ought to be abandoned constitutes this humility here; others say it is being absorbed in a pitiable, compassion-evoking state. That he 'approached the lotus feet of the Lord' is itself the fruit of his being established as a disciple, surrendered to the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover, even accepting unrighteousness, one might still act thus, if victory were certainly ours -- for then, at least, we would have that certain knowledge -- he says, in 'Na chaitad...': this too we do not know, which of the two is greater, more significant, for us: whether we shall conquer them, or whether they shall conquer us. By our own reckoning, however, it appears that their victory over us would be more significant even than our victory over them -- he says this, in 'Yan eva...': those very ones, having slain whom we would have no wish even to live, the sons of Dhritarashtra, our paternal cousins, brothers, stand arrayed there before us for battle. Hence, having slain them, what shall we accomplish? -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
If this be so, then alms alone would be truly good for you -- anticipating this objection, he says, in 'Na chaitad...': though begging is indeed desirable for one who is not a Kshatriya, still, we Kshatriyas do not know which of the two, alms or the enjoyment of pleasures, is truly greater. One might object: has it not already been said that battle alone is greater? -- he says this, in 'Yadva...': whether we shall conquer the enemies, or whether the enemies shall conquer us -- this too we do not know. In the final alternative, an unsought death, or alms alone, would result, is the sense. One might object: with me as your ally, is not your victory itself certain? -- anticipating this, he says, in 'Yan eva...': even victory, through the loss of what one holds dear, would be nothing but defeat, is the sense. As for the notion that, the superiority of alms being already settled, a further doubt as to which is truly greater between battle and alms is not proper, and that therefore the question should rather be explained as which of the two armies is greater -- this is not correct. For, given the remainder of the statement, 'his mind bewildered by dharma,' the doubt as here stated is indeed the proper one; and since the doubt over which army is greater would, if resolved otherwise, render the doubt over victory pointless in itself, and since it would involve the fault of importing an unwarranted specification, the correct reading must be as here explained.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Nor do we know which is better – conquering them or being conquered by them. If we killed the sons of Dhritarashtra, we should not care to live. Yet they are now standing before us on the battlefield.

 Arjuna did not know whether he should fight and risk unnecessary violence, although fighting is the duty of the kshatriyas, or whether he should refrain and live by begging. If he did not conquer the enemy, begging would be his only means of subsistence. Nor was there certainty of victory, because either side might emerge victorious. Even if victory awaited them (and their cause was justified), still, if the sons of Dhritarashtra died in battle, it would be very difficult to live in their absence. Under the circumstances, that would be another kind of defeat for them. All these considerations by Arjuna definitely proved that not only was he a great devotee of the Lord but he was also highly enlightened and had complete control over his mind and senses. His desire to live by begging, although he was born in the royal household, is another sign of detachment. He was truly virtuous, as these qualities, combined with his faith in the words of instruction of Sri Krishna (his spiritual master), indicate. It is concluded that Arjuna was quite fit for liberation. Unless the senses are controlled, there is no chance of elevation to the platform of knowledge, and without knowledge and devotion there is no chance of liberation. Arjuna was competent in all these attributes, over and above his enormous attributes in his material relationships.