Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śreyānsvadharmo viguṇaḥ paradharmātsvanuṣṭhitāt .
svabhāvaniyataṃ karma kurvannāpnoti kilbiṣam

Word Meanings:
श्रेयान् - better
स्वधर्मः - ones own duty
विगुणः - destitute of merits
परधर्मात् - than the duty of another
स्वनुष्ठितात् - well performed
स्वभावनियतम् - ordained by his own
कर्म - action
कुर्वन् - doing
न - not
आप्नोति - incurs
किल्बिषम् - sin.

Life Application:
Better is one's own duty though flawed than another's duty well performed; doing work prescribed by nature, one incurs no sin.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
One's own duty, though devoid of merits, is better than the duty of another well performed. By doing the work ordained by one's own nature, one does not incur sin.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Better is one's own duty (though) destitute of merits, than the duty of another well performed. He who does the duty ordained by his own nature incurs no sin.

श्रेयान् better? स्वधर्मः ones own duty? विगुणः (though) destitute of merits? परधर्मात् that the duty of another? स्वनुष्ठितात् (than) well performed? स्वभावनियतम् ordained by his own nature? कर्म action? कुर्वन् doing? न not? आप्नोति (he) incurs? किल्बिषम् sin.Commentary Just as a poisonous substance does not harm the worm born in that substance? so he who does his Svadharma (the duty ordained according to his own nature) does not incur any sin.What is poison to the whole world is sweet to a worm and yet sugarcane juice that is sweet causes its death. So a mans appointed duty which frees him from bondage must? therefore? be practised however difficult it may seem to be. If you try to do the duty of another it will bring,danger. He who has no knowledge of the Self cannot remain even for a moment without doing action. (Cf.III.35)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
It is better to do one's own duty, however defective it may be, than to follow the duty of another, however well one may perform it. He who does his duty as his own nature reveals it, never sins.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
One's own duty, though devoid of merit, is better than the duty of another well performed. Action dictated by one's own nature (Svadharma) does not bring sin or new binding desires, even if it is defective. Just as a snake's poison does not harm the snake, one's natural duties are aligned with their temperament, whereas performing actions contrary to one's nature is futile and causes inner conflict and deeper bondage.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Better is one's own prescribed duties, [born of  one's nature, even though] it is devoid of ality, than another's duty well executed; the doer of duty, dependent on (or prescribed according to)  one's own nature, does not incur sin.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Better is one's own duty, though ill done, than the duty of another, though well-performed৷৷৷৷৷৷ When one does the duty ordained by his own nature, he incurs no stain.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
One's own duty, (though) defective, is superior to another's duty well performed. By performing a duty as dictated by one's own nature, one does not incur sin.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Performing one's own duty leads to the purification of the intellect and ultimately to liberation, hence it is essential. One does not incur sin even when performing actions that seem violent or flawed (like battle), as long as they are ordained as one's duty based on one's nature.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Better is one's own duty, though devoid of merits, than the duty of another well performed. He who performs the duty ordained by his own nature incurs no sin.

Commentary: Svadharma refers to the duty suited to one's nature and situation in life. Even if one's Svadharma seems defective or lacks the merits of another's duty, it is still superior because it is natural to him. Performing Svadharma without selfish desire or attachment purifies the soul. Even if there are flaws in its execution, the performer does not incur sin.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
One's proper Dharma is that which is suitable for performance by oneself, in the form of worshipping Myself, relinishing agency etc., as has been taught. For, Karma Yoga, consisting in the activities of sense organs, is easy to perform by one in association with Prakrti. Thus, Karma Yoga, even if it is defective in some respects, is better than the Dharma of another, i.e., than Jnana-yoga, even for a person capable of controlling his senses, which is an attainment liable to negligence, because it consists of control over all sense-organs; for, though this may be well performed occasionaly, one is always liable to deflection from it.

He explains the same:

As Karma consists of the activities of the sense-organs, it is ordained by Nature for one who is conjoined with Prakrti, i.e., the body. So by performing Karma Yoga one does not incur any stain. But Jnana Yoga is liable to negligence, because it reires the control of the senses from the very beginning for its performance. One intent on it is likely to incur stain from negligence. [Thus we are reminded about what was mentioned in the third chapter - that Karma Yoga alone is greater.]

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Svadharmah, one's own duty; though vigunah, defective-the word though has to be supplied-; is sreyan, superior to, more praiseworthy than; paradharmat, another's duty; su-anusthitat, well performed. Kurvan, by performing; karma, a duty; svabhavaniyatam, as dictated by one's own nature-this phrase means the same as svabhavajam (born from Nature) which has been stated earlier-; na apnoti, one does not incur; kilbisam, sin. As poison is not harmful to a worm born it it, so one does not incur sin by performing a duty dictated by one's own nature.
It has been siad that, as in the case of a worm born in poison, a person does not incur sin while performing his duties which have been dictated by his own nature; and that someone else's duty is fraught with fear; also that, one who does not have the knoweldge of the Self, (he) surely cannot remain even for a moment without doing work (cf. 3.5). Hence-

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
One's own duty, though devoid of merits, is superior to the duty of another well performed. By doing the work dictated by one's own nature (such as battle for a Kshatriya), one does not incur sin.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
One's own duty, though imperfectly performed, is superior to another's duty well performed. By doing the work ordained by one's own nature (like battle for a warrior, and not begging which is a Brahmana's duty), one does not incur sin.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
One's own duty, though devoid of merits, is better than another's duty well performed. By doing the duty ordained by one's own nature, one does not incur sin.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
One's own duty, though devoid of merits, is superior to another's duty well performed. By doing the duty ordained by one's own nature, one does not incur sin, just as a worm born in poison is not harmed by that poison.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
One's own duty, though defective, is superior to another's duty well performed. Since performing Svadharma is easy and free from negligence, one does not incur sin. Jnana Yoga, being difficult and liable to negligence due to constant sense-control, can bring downfall.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
One's own duty, though defective, is superior to another's duty well performed. By doing the work dictated by one's own nature, one does not incur sin.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
By performing the actions ordained by one's own nature, which proceed from the Inner Controller, one does not incur sin. Offering Svadharma to the Lord is the gate to liberation.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
It is better to engage in one’s own occupation, even though one may perform it imperfectly, than to accept another’s occupation and perform it perfectly. Duties prescribed according to one’s nature are never affected by sinful reactions.

 One’s occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gītā . As already discussed in previous verses, the duties of a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra are prescribed according to their particular modes of nature. One should not imitate another’s duty. A man who is by nature attracted to the kind of work done by śūdras should not artificially claim to be a brāhmaṇa, although he may have been born into a brāhmaṇa family. In this way one should work according to his own nature; no work is abominable, if performed in the service of the Supreme Lord. The occupational duty of a brāhmaṇa is certainly in the mode of goodness, but if a person is not by nature in the mode of goodness, he should not imitate the occupational duty of a brāhmaṇa. For a kṣatriya, or administrator, there are so many abominable things; a kṣatriya has to be violent to kill his enemies, and sometimes a kṣatriya has to tell lies for the sake of diplomacy. Such violence and duplicity accompany political affairs, but a kṣatriya is not supposed to give up his occupational duty and try to perform the duties of a brāhmaṇa. One should act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. For example, Arjuna was a kṣatriya. He was hesitating to fight the other party. But if such fighting is performed for the sake of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there need be no fear of degradation. In the business field also, sometimes a merchant has to tell so many lies to make a profit. If he does not do so, there can be no profit. Sometimes a merchant says, “Oh, my dear customer, for you I am making no profit,” but one should know that without profit the merchant cannot exist. Therefore it should be taken as a simple lie if a merchant says that he is not making a profit. But the merchant should not think that because he is engaged in an occupation in which the telling of lies is compulsory, he should give up his profession and pursue the profession of a brāhmaṇa. That is not recommended. Whether one is a kṣatriya, a vaiśya, or a śūdra doesn’t matter, if he serves, by his work, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even brāhmaṇas, who perform different types of sacrifice, sometimes must kill animals because sometimes animals are sacrificed in such ceremonies. Similarly, if a kṣatriya engaged in his own occupation kills an enemy, there is no sin incurred. In the Third Chapter these matters have been clearly and elaborately explained; every man should work for the purpose of Yajña, or for Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anything done for personal sense gratification is a cause of bondage. The conclusion is that everyone should be engaged according to the particular mode of nature he has acquired, and he should decide to work only to serve the supreme cause of the Supreme Lord.