Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
brāhmaṇakṣatriyaviśāṃ śūdrāṇāṃ ca parantapa .
karmāṇi pravibhaktāni svabhāvaprabhavairguṇaiḥ

Word Meanings:
ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशाम् - of Brahmanas
शूद्राणाम् - of Sudras
च - as also
परंतप - O Parantapa
कर्माणि - duties
प्रविभक्तानि - are distributed
स्वभावप्रभवैः - born of their own
गुणैः - by qualities

Life Application:
Duties of different vocations are distributed according to gunas born of their own nature.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Parantapa, the duties of the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas, as also of the Sudras, are distributed according to the qualities born of their own nature.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, as also of Sudras, O Arjuna, the duties are distributed according to the alities born of their own nature.

ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशाम् of Brahmanas? Kshatriyas and Vaisyas? शूद्राणाम् of Sudras? च as also? परंतप O Parantapa? कर्माणि duties? प्रविभक्तानि are distributed? स्वभावप्रभवैः born of their own nature? गुणैः by alities.Commentary Brahmanas? Kshatriyas and Vaisyas are alified to practise the Vedic rites. The members of the fourth class? O Arjuna? have no claim to these rites? for their profession is to serve the members of the first three. They are not allowed to study the Vedas or perform Yajnas. There is organisation of mankind into the four castes and each mans life is divided into four stages? according to the nature of the Gunas and the degree of the growth or evolution. I will now explain the specific duties of these castes according to the alities by means of which? freeing themselves from the grip of birth and death? they can attain Selfrealisation or knowledge of the Self. Passion (Rajas) slightly mingled with Tamas causes the growth of the merchant caste (the Vaisya). Rajas mixed with Tamas is the cause of the appearance of the Sudra.The one human race has been divided into four castes based upon the three alities. The duties are allotted to each according to the alities born of Nature.Nature (Svabhava) is Isvaras Prakriti (Maya) constituted of the three alities -- Sattva? Rajas and Tamas.The Brahmanas nature is Sattva. So he is serene. The nature of the Kshatriya is Rajas and Sattva. Sattva in his case is subordinate to Rajas. Rajas predominates. Therefore he possesses lordliness. The nature of the Vaisya is Rajas and Tamas. Tamas is subordinate to Rajas. So he does various sorts of activities or business to earn money. The nature of the Sudra is Tamas? with subordinate Rajas. He is dull.Karma is action arising from and fashioned by past thoughts and desires. The Gunas cannot manifest themselves without a cause. Nature is the tendency? Samskara or Vasana in living beings. This is acired by them in the past births. This manifests itself in the present birth and produces its effects. This nature is the source of the Gunas. Every man or woman is born with his or her own Svabhava (nature). The Gunas operate according to the respective natural tendencies of man which impel him to perform his own duties as their natural effects. The duties are allottted to the four classes or castes in accordance with the Gunas of individuals. (Cf.IV.13)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
O Arjuna! The duties of spiritual teachers, the soldiers, the traders and the servants have all been fixed according to the dominant Quality in their nature.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
After describing the three Gunas in detail, Sri Krishna classifies society into four varnas: Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, according to the predominant Gunas in their Svabhava (inherent nature and mental impressions). The duties assigned to each class are intended to help individuals lift themselves from Tamas and Rajas to pure Sattva, eventually transcending the Gunas. This division is based on aptitude and temperament, not merely hereditary birth. Varna is determined by examining a person's knowledge, action, intellect, and determination.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The duties of the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas, the Vaisyas, and of the Sudras are properly classified according to the Strands which are the sources of their nature, O scorcher of foes !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The duties of the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and the Sudras are clearly divided, O Arjuna, according to Gunas, born of their nature.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O scorcher of enemies, the duties of the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas, as also of the Sudras have been fully classified according to the gunas born from Nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The three castes (Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas) share eligibility for Vedic rituals, hence they are grouped together, whereas Sudras are mentioned separately. The distribution of duties is not arbitrary but depends on Gunas which arise from past samskaras (impressions from previous births).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Parantapa, the duties of the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas, as also of the Sudras, are distributed according to the qualities born of their own nature.

Commentary: The three Gunas manifest as natural tendencies (Svabhava) determined by the impressions of actions done in previous births. The Lord divides the duties accordingly: Sattva is predominant in Brahmanas; Rajas is predominant in Kshatriyas (with Sattva subordinate); Rajas is predominant in Vaisyas (with Tamas subordinate); and Tamas is predominant in Sudras. Human beings have different proportions of these Gunas, and their duties are aligned with their nature. Using these duties as a means to serve and worship the Divine is the path to spiritual elevation.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The nature of Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras are due to their respective inherent dispositions. The meaning is that their past Karma has been the cause of determining births as Brahmanas etc. The Sattva and other Gunas are the result of such Karma. The Sattva-guna is born from the inherent nature of the Brahmana becoming dominant by suppressing the alities of Rajas and Tamas. The ality of Rajas originates from the inherent nature of the Ksatriyas becoming dominant by suppressing alities of Sattva and Tamas. Tamoguna arises from the inherent nature of the Vaisya, becoming dominant in a little way by suppressing Sattva and Rajas. The duties and works assigned to them according to the Gunas constituting their inherent nature, are expounded and allotted by the Sastras in the order described. For the Sastras analyse that the Brahmanas etc., possess such and such attributes and such and such are their duties and occupations.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Parantapa, O scorcher of enemies; karmani, the duties; brahmana-ksatriya-visam, of the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas; ca, as also; sudranam, of the Surdras-the Sudras have not been included with the others (in the compund word) because, owing to their having a single birth, [Sudras have no right to be invested with the sacred thread which, in the case of the other three castes, symbolizes a second birth.] they have no right to (the study of) the Vedas; pravibhaktani, have been fully classified, have been prescribed by making distinctions among them;-according to what?-gunahi, according to the gunas; svabhava-prabhavaih, born from Nature.
Nature means the Praktrti of God, His Maya consisting of the three gunas. 'Born from Nature' means 'born of these three gunas. In accordnace with these the duties such as control of the internal organs, etc. of the Brahmanas and others have been classified. Or (the meaning is): The source of the nature of the Brahmanas is the ality of sattva. Similarly, the source of the nature of the Ksatriyas is rajas, with sattva as a subordinate (ality); the source of the nature of the Vaisyas is rajas, with tamas as the subordinate (ality); the source of the nature of the Sudras is tamas, with rajas as the subordinate (ality); for the natures of the four are seen to be tranillity. lordliness, industriousness and dullness respectively. Or, svabhava (nature) means the (individual) tendencies of creatures earned in their past lives, which have become manifest in the present life for yielding their own results. The gunas which have that svabhava as their source (prabhava) are svabhava-prabhavah gunah.
Since the manifestation of the gunas cannot logically be uncaused, therefore a specific cause [i.e. the tendencies are the efficient cause, and Nature is the material cause.] has been posited by saying that Nature is the cause.
Thus, the duties such as control of the internal organs etc. have been classified in keeping with the effects of the gunas, sattva, rajas and tamas, which are born of Nature, born of Prakrti.
Objection: Well, are not the duties like controlling the internal organs etc. of the Brahmanas and others classified and enjoined by the scriptures? Why is it said that they are classified according to the gunas sattva etc.?
Reply: This objection is not valid. For, the duties like controlling the internal organs etc. of the Brahmanas and others have been classified even by the scriptures verily in keeping with the specific alities sattva etc.; certainly, not without reference to the gunas. Hence, though the duties have been divided by the scriputres, they are said to have been classified according to the gunas.
Which, again, are those duties? They are being spoken of:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sannyasa and Tyaga are in essence the same, consisting of relinquishing agency and the fruits of actions, which comes from the increase of Sattva-guna. The duties of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras are divided according to Gunas born of Nature (Svabhava).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The duties of the four classes are divided according to the Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas) which represent their respective natural tendencies (Svabhava) shaped by past impressions (samskaras).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The duties of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras are divided according to Gunas born of Nature (Svabhava).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The three twice-born castes have eligibility for Vedic study, hence they are grouped together. Sudras, being single-born, are mentioned separately. Their duties are divided according to Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas) manifesting from past impressions.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Past karma determines one's birth and inherent nature (Svabhava). The Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas) manifest from this Svabhava. According to these Gunas, the duties of the four castes are divided.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The duties of the four castes are divided according to the Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas) born of Nature (Svabhava), which reflects their past association with the qualities of material nature.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The duties of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras are divided according to Gunas born of Nature (Svabhava).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras are distinguished by the qualities born of their own natures in accordance with the material modes, O chastiser of the enemy.

There is no purport for this verse