Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyurdhruvaṃ janma mṛtasya ca .
tasmādaparihārye.arthe na tvaṃ śocitumarhasi

Word Meanings:
जातस्य - of the born
हि - for
ध्रुवः - certain
मृत्युः - death
ध्रुवम् - certain
जन्म - birth
मृतस्य - of the dead
च - and
तस्मात् - therefore
अपरिहार्ये - inevritable
अर्थे - in matter
न - not
त्वम् - thou
शोचितुम् - to grieve
अर्हसि - you ought to

Life Application:
Stop wasting energy railing against unavoidable life events, focusing instead on how you respond to them.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Death is certain for the one who is born, and birth is certain for the one who dies; therefore, over that which is inevitable, you ought not to grieve.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
For certain is death for the born, and certain is birth for the dead; therefore, over the inevitable thou shouldst not grieve.

जातस्य of the born? हि for? ध्रुवः certain? मृत्युः death? ध्रुवम् certain? जन्म birth? मृतस्य of the dead? च and? तस्मात् therefore? अपरिहार्ये inevritable? अर्थे in matter? न not? त्वम् thou? शोचितुम् to grieve? अर्हसि (thou) oughtest.Commentary Birth is sure to happen to that which is dead death is sure to happen to what which is born. Birth and death are certainly unavoidable. Therefore? you should not grieve over an inevitable matter.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
For death is as sure for that which is born, as birth is for that which is dead. Therefore grieve not for what is inevitable.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The materialist atheists hold that things do not arise without some antecedent cause. The theists, accepting the existence of a living being distinct from the body, say that the same being takes on many bodies from an evolutionary standpoint, so that it may come to recognize the ultimate Truth behind this visible world. What is common to both views is that both accept life to be a chain of births and deaths. Having thus understood the nature of life, no discerning person should grieve over the ceaseless occurrence of birth and death. If someone stands outside in the scorching summer sun and complains of its heat and glare, that is indeed a sign of foolishness. Likewise, having obtained life, to complain of its changeable nature is an unpardonable folly. To grieve for the reason stated above is itself a mark of one's own ignorance. Krishna's life conveys a message of joy and enthusiasm. His message of life is: weeping is a mark of ignorance, and laughter of wisdom. 'Keep laughing' -- in these two words Krishna's teaching may be summed up. It is for this reason that, seeing his friend overcome with grief, he sets out to protect him from grief and delusion, and for this the next ten verses present the ordinary person's viewpoint. Bhagavan Shankaracharya, in his commentary, says that grieving over things bound by cause and effect is not proper, because

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Death is certain indeed for what is born;  and birth is certain for what is dead.  Therefore you should not lament over a thing that is unavoidable.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
For, death is certain for the born, and re-birth is certain for the dead; therefore you should not feel grief for what is inevitable.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
For death of anyone born is certain, and of the dead (re-) birth is a certainly. Therefore you ought not to grieve over an inevitable fact.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Why should there be no grief? Because this is simply the fixed rule -- this is stated by 'jatasya...'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Even though birth and death are both inevitable, he states yet another reason why grief is not to be indulged in -- this is said with 'tatha ca...'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Because whoever is born will surely die, and whoever has died will surely be born. This (flow of change in the form of birth and death) cannot be averted or prevented. Therefore you ought not to grieve over this matter.

Explanation -- 'jatasya hi dhruvo mrtyur dhruvam janma mrtasya ca' -- as per the previous verse, even if the embodied Self is granted to be constantly born and dying, still it cannot be a matter for grief. Because whatever has been born will surely die, and whatever has died will surely be born.

'tasmad aparihary’e arthe na tvam socitum arhasi' -- therefore no one can avert (prevent) this flow in the form of birth and death, because no one has even the slightest control over it. This flow of birth and death has been going on since beginningless time and will continue for endless time. From this standpoint too, it is not fitting for you to grieve.

These sons of Dhritarashtra, having been born, will surely die. You have no means by which you could save them. Those who die will surely be born again. You cannot prevent that either. Then what is there to grieve over? Grieve only for that which is impossible, not for that which is bound to happen anyway. Just as everyone knows that if the sun has risen it will surely set, and if it sets it will surely rise again --

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
For what has originated, destruction is certain - it is seen to be inevitable. Similarly what has perished will inevitably originate. How should this be understood - that there is origination for that (entity)which has perished?  It is seen that an existing entity only can originate and not a non-existent one. Origination, annihilation etc., are merely particular states of an existent entity.

Now thread etc., do really exist. When arranged in a particular way, they are called clothes etc. It is seen that even those who uphold the doctrine that the effect is a new entity (Asatkarya-vadins) will admit this much that no new entity over and above the particular arrangement of threads is seen. It is not tenable to hold that this is the coming into being of a new entity, since, by the process of manufacture there is only attainment of a new name and special functions. No new entity emerges.

Origination, annihilation etc., are thus particular stages of an existent entity. With regard to an entity which has entered into a stage known as origination, its entry into the opposite condition is called annihilation. Of an evolving entity, a seqence of evolutionary stages is inevitable. For instance, clay becomes a lump, jug, a potsherd, and (finally) powder. Here, what is called annihilation is the attainment of a succeeding stage by an entity which existed previously in a preceding stage. And this annihilation itself is called birth in that stage. Thus, the seence called birth and annihilation being inevitable for an evolving entity, it is not worthy of you to grieve.

Now Sri Krsna says that not even the slightest grief arising from seeing an entity passing from a previous existing stage to an opposite stage, is justifiable in regard to human beings etc.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Jatasya etc.  Destruction comes after birth, and after the destruction comes birth.  Thus, this series of birth-and-death is like a circle.  Hence to what extent is this to be lamented for ?	
 Furthermore-

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
This being so, 'death of anyone born', etc. Hi, for; mrtyuh, death; jatasya, of anyone born; dhruvah, is certain; is without exception; ca, and mrtasya, of the dead; janmah, (re-) birth; is dhruvam, a certainly. Tasmat, therefore, this fact, viz birth and death, is inevitable. With regard to that (fact), apariharye, over an enevitable; arthe, fact; tvam, you; na arhasi, ought not; socitum, to grieve.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
With this very intent, the next two verses are introduced in sequence as forming a single continuous statement -- 'kutah...' Having restated the doubt, it was said 'tathapi na socitum arhasi'; here the reason for that is being given.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
When asked for what reason (it is not fitting to grieve), he answers. 'Hi' means 'because.' For the born, death is certain, and for the dead, birth is inevitable and certain. Thus, over this inevitable matter, you ought not to grieve.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
If, even under the view that the Self endures until universal dissolution, or is eternal, you still grieve out of fear of possible visible and invisible suffering -- in answer to this, he speaks the second verse. For one who is born -- that is, the abiding Self that has obtained connection with a body and senses through the force of its own merit and demerit -- death, that is, the severance of that body and so forth, is inevitable, since the karma that initiated it is exhausted, and union always ends in separation. Likewise, birth for the dead is also certain, since it is necessary for the Self, still bearing residual impressions, to take up the enjoyment of the fruits of karma done through the previous body -- this does not conflict with the liberated-while-living. Therefore, over this inevitable matter of birth and death -- which cannot be averted -- O learned one, you ought not to grieve. Hence it will be said later, 'even without you, all these will cease to be.' If these men would remain alive after being struck down by you in battle, then your grief over the battle would be justified; but they will die of their own accord through the exhaustion of their own karma -- so grief over what is beyond your power to prevent, caused by visible suffering, is not proper. The same answer applies to grief caused by unseen suffering as well -- 'over this inevitable matter.' The act called warfare is, for a kshatriya, as obligatory as the agnihotra sacrifice and the like.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
For what reason (this is said) -- 'jatasya iti.' Because for one who has taken birth upon the exhaustion of the karma that initiated it, death is certain. And for one who has died, birth is also certain, due to the karma performed through the previous body. Therefore, in this inevitable -- that is, unavoidable -- matter of birth and death, O learned one, it is not proper for you to grieve -- that is, you are not fit to do so.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
In this view, he clarifies the absence of grief -- 'jatasya iti.' Even if you grieve out of fear of visible and invisible suffering while granting the Self to endure until universal dissolution, or to be eternal, the answer is that this inevitable matter of birth and death cannot be averted. The act called warfare is unavoidable for a kshatriya, since the first half of the verse concerns precisely the inevitability of birth and death. Addressing him as 'mahabaho' also hints that, by not grieving, the greatness of his arms is made meaningful.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
To rule out other meanings of the words 'dhruva,' 'mrtyu,' 'mrta,' and the like, he explains 'jatasya...,' which supports the matter under discussion. The word 'upalabhyate' conveys the established proof indicated by 'hi.' An objection is raised: if the dead were to be reborn, since complete liberation from suffering would then be impossible, the entire scripture of liberation would become groundless, and efforts to overcome disease and conquer enemies would be pointless, nor would grieving over the death of a son and the like be improper. In answer, it is said that origination occurs only for an existent entity, never for a non-existent one -- just as threads, which always exist, come to be called cloth through a particular arrangement; even those who hold that the effect is a wholly new entity concede only this much, that no new substance appears beyond the special arrangement. Thus origination and destruction are merely particular states of an existing substance -- as with a lump, jar, potsherd, or powder made of clay. The destruction of a prior state is itself the origination of the next. Thus this succession of states is unavoidable for any substance subject to change, and hence grief over it is not warranted. Moreover, the slight grief that might arise on seeing a soul pass into an opposing state among the various species (human and so on) is, properly considered, not truly possible either -- this will be elaborated further ahead.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Objection: Since none is as mighty as you, it is indeed proper to grieve for the weak -- to this, he replies with 'jatasya iti.' Death is certain for the body that is born, and birth is certain for the dead -- this is the meaning. The sense here is: for one born, that is, whose death has already been ordained by the Lord, death occurs precisely as ordained by Him. So those whose death has been ordained through you will occur just so. Thus, whatever the Lord has ordained will happen exactly that way -- over this inevitable, wholly certain matter, you are not fit to grieve. This is the fitting sense of the word 'hi.' Who else is capable of altering what the Lord has done?

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Having said 'it is not proper to grieve,' the reason for that is now given -- 'jatasya iti.' 'Dhruva' means inevitable, 'mrtyu' means death. Over the inevitable matter called death -- a matter bound to occur even without your effort -- it is not proper for you to grieve. It will also be said later, 'By Me alone have these already been slain' (11.33).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who has taken his birth is sure to die, and after death one is sure to take birth again. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you should not lament.

 One has to take birth according to one’s activities of life. And after finishing one term of activities, one has to die to take birth for the next. In this way one is going through one cycle of birth and death after another without liberation. This cycle of birth and death does not, however, support unnecessary murder, slaughter and war. But at the same time, violence and war are inevitable factors in human society for keeping law and order. The Battle of Kurukṣetra, being the will of the Supreme, was an inevitable event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of a kṣatriya. Why should he be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of his relatives since he was discharging his proper duty? He did not deserve to break the law, thereby becoming subjected to the reactions of sinful acts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding the discharge of his proper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his relatives, and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path of action.