Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
jñeyaṃ yattatpravakṣyāmi yajjñātvāmṛtamaśnute .
anādi matparaṃ brahma na sattannāsaducyate

Word Meanings:
ज्ञेयम् - has to be known
यत् - which
तत् - that
प्रवक्ष्यामि - will declare
यत् - which
ज्ञात्वा - knowing
अमृतम् - immortality
अश्नुते - attains to
अनादिमत् - the beginningless
परम् - supreme
ब्रह्म - Brahman
न - not
सत् - eternal reality
तत् - that
न - not
असत् - unreal
उच्यते - is called.

Life Application:
Know that which ought to be known, attaining immortality: the beginningless supreme Brahman, neither being nor non-being.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
I will clearly describe that knowable thing by knowing which man attains immortality. He is knowable - the eternal, ultimate Brahma, who can be called neither true nor false.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
I will declare that which has to be known, knowing which one attains to immortality, the beginningless supreme Brahman, called neither being nor non-being.

ज्ञेयम् has to be known? यत् which? तत् that? प्रवक्ष्यामि (I) will declare? यत् which? ज्ञात्वा knowing? अमृतम् immortality? अश्नुते (one) attains to? अनादिमत् the beginningless? परम् supreme? ब्रह्म Brahman? न not? सत् being? तत् that? न not? असत् nonbeing? उच्यते is called.Commentary The Lord praises that which ought to be known (Para Brahman) in order to create in Arjuna (or any hearer) an intense desire to know It.Brahman cannot be expressed in words like being or nonbeing? because Brahman does not belong to any class or genus like a Brahmana? cow or horse. It has no ality like whiteness? blackness? etc. It has no relation or connection with anything else? because It is one without a second. It is no object of any sense. It is beyond the reach of the mind and the senses. It is actionless. It is the great transcendental and unmanifested Absolute. It is always the witnessing subject in all objects.The Vedas emphatically declare that Brahman is without attributes? activity? attachment or parts.In chapter IX. 19 it was stated that He is the being and also the nonbeing. It is now stated that He is neither being nor nonbeing. This would seem to the readers to be a contradiction in terms but it is not so. Though the manifest (perishable) and the unmanifest (imperishable) universe are both forms of Brahman? He is beyond both these. (Cf.VII.2XV.16?17and18)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
I will speak to thee now of that great Truth which man ought to know, since by its means he will win immortal bliss - that which is without beginning, the Eternal Spirit which dwells in Me, neither with form, nor yet without it.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
After narrating the knowledge in the previous five verses? Now God promises to tell the known thing. But? First, what do they say is the result of knowing it? Which some people criticize. But? This criticism is not appropriate? Because praising the fruit of knowledge leads to a tendency to ritualize its means? Interest and enthusiasm is generated. Knowing whom? The seeker attains immortality, the religion of inanimate matter is death. Due to identification with these inanimate titles, the immortal soul, separated from them, unnecessarily experiences false separation and death. By recognizing one's self through self-consciousness and attaining a firm position in it, this false fear of death is eliminated and one experiences the bliss of the soul in the form of nectar. To achieve such a supreme goal, we should make our conscience resourceful with the qualities mentioned earlier. Anadimatparam Brahma The beginningless i.e. beginning of any thing can be imagined and calculated only in the context of an eternal establishment. Which is also the foundation of God's time? Its origin cannot be considered. Brahma can neither be called real nor unreal. The thing which is visible to the general eye? We call it truth. But who is the conscious seer? He ever senses? Cannot the mind and intellect be known? That is why it is said that it is not true. Chaitanya Tattva, being the illuminator of all things, is itself beyond all experiences. If it is not true? So will we consider it false? Therefore, it has also been prohibited here. Is an extremely lacking thing called unreal? like the sky? Flowers? Bandhyaputra etc. Brahma cannot be called unreal. Because He is the cause of the entire universe. Therefore, how can the world be accomplished if it is absent? Neti in the Upanishads? It is directed in the language of Neti (not this). Shankaracharya ji says? Brahm cannot be called a being because it is devoid of caste and qualities? And because it is expressed in the form of consciousness in all the bodies, it cannot be called unreal. This attitude that is true i.e. an object and unreal i.e. it is not an object also arises in the intellect only. Which self-consciousness is the illuminator of these two instincts? He is different from both. This fact has been confirmed here. Should no person consider it as zero from the above statement? Therefore, while making aware of the existence of Brahma through the titles of all living beings, God says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
I shall describe that which is to be known, by knowing which one attains freedom from death : beginningless is the Supreme Brahman; It is said to be neither existent nor non-existent.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
I shall declare that which is to be known, knowing which one attains the immortal self. It is beginningless brahman having Me for the Highest (Anadi matparam); it is said to be neither being nor-being.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
I shall speak of that which is to be known, by realizing which one attains Immortality. The supreme Brahman is without any beginning. That is called neither being nor non-being.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
and the Supreme Brahmetis, who [13.4] is said to be promised. Anyatyatprabhavah [13.4] is the original, devoid of the body, the non-original. Otherwise it would be eternal.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
When the Brahman, who is devoid of all distinctions, is visible to the speech and mind, and is opposite to sight, he shows that the Brahman is empty, directly the cause of sense instincts and others, and the God who gives vitality to the supposed dual entities. Sachchabdeti. That word means the knowable Brahman, that is, that existence. That doubt is called non-being by that word. If, indeed, the hands and feet are in all bodies, how is it that the hands and feet are self-righteous because they are in the body? The instinct of doing is preceded by the possessor of consciousness, since it is the instinct preceding the observation of the instinct of chariots and others. Even if the existence of consciousness is proved by the above instinct, how can the existence of the knower of the field exist? And therefore the remainder is a special statement in that which is titled. How, then, is the statement of non-specificity that neither being nor non-being is said to be non-specific? If the essence of hands and feet and other things is false, how can it be said in the authority of knowable discourse? The old consensus that even a false form is useful for knowledge of the knowable object is said to be so. If it is asked what is the reason for the explanation of the hands, feet, etc., which have gone to others as their own characteristics, he says, "Everywhere. The plan is that the power of the knowable Brahman, the ability to initiate by mere presence, makes water and others have their own functions by making that being the cause. He overstates what is said in the beginning of the eyes from all sides -- so be it. That knowable, as explained as hands and feet everywhere, reveals what has been said -- everywhere. He says for the literal meaning of the words 'eyes everywhere' and so on: 'eyes everywhere. Being like the eyes and hearing is the characteristic of the remaining sense of perception like the hands, feet and mouth, and the remaining sense of action is like the mind, intellect and other beings. It achieves the existence of one everywhere as water and other things -- everything.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
I will clearly describe that which is knowable (the Supreme Being), knowing which man experiences immortality. He (the knowable element) is the eternal and supreme Brahman. It can neither be called true nor untrue.

Explanation -  Gyayam Yattatpravakshyaami - God, while undertaking the description of the Gyaya Tattva here, pledges that for the attainment of which the human body has been given? Which Upanishads describe? Has been done in the scriptures and texts? I will thoroughly describe that attainable knowable element. What is meant by saying jneyam (definitely knowable) is that all the subjects in the world? Substance? Disciplines? Are there arts etc.? Not all of them are necessarily worth knowing. Of course, there is only one God who is worth knowing. Because no matter how much one knows about worldly matters? Still, it remains to be known. Even birth and death will not be eradicated by knowledge of worldly matters. But after knowing God properly from the elements, there will be nothing left to know. Even birth and death will not be eradicated by knowledge of worldly matters. But after knowing God properly from the elements, there will be no more knowing and birth and death will also be eliminated. Therefore, there is no one else in the world worth knowing except God. Yajjnyatvamritmashnute - By knowing that knowable principle, one experiences immortality, that is, one attains the self-evident principle.Whose attainment will you know? to do? There is nothing left to achieve. In fact, is oneself already immortal? But by uniting with the mortal body he has accepted himself as one who is born and dies. By knowing the essence of God, this mistake is erased and one recognizes one's true nature, i.e. one experiences immortality. Anadimat - Only the world arises from it? Lives in it and ultimately gets absorbed in it. But that etc? In the middle and at the end, the same exists. Hence it is called eternal. Param Brahma - Brahma Prakriti is also called? Also called Vedas? But the Supreme Brahma is only one God. Is there anything more comprehensive than that? fearless? Is it not an eternal element? That is called Param Brahma. Na Sattannasduchyate - That element cannot be called true and cannot be called false either. Because without false feeling (existence) the word 'sat' is not used in that divine essence? Therefore, it cannot be called true and there is never any absence of that divine essence? Therefore it cannot be called untrue.It means that in that divine essence there is no tendency of true words i.e. speech - it is a cause-free element. Just like there are two nights and days on earth. In these also the absence of day is called night and the absence of night is called day. But in the Sun there is no difference between day and night. The reason is that there is no night in the Sun and due to the extreme absence of night, it cannot be called day in the Sun because the word day is used in anticipation of night. If there is no power of night then neither can it be called day? Neither night. In the same way, the word 'Asat' is used for good expectation and the word 'Sat' is used for false expectation. Where God is said to be true? There it is said only out of false expectation. But where untruth is sorely lacking? There God cannot be called true and the God who is continuously true? It cannot be called untrue. Therefore, both the words 'true' and 'false' are not used in God. Like the Sun is just a form of light, different from both day and night? Similarly, that knowable element is unique from both the real and the unreal (Commentary P. 687.2). Second thing?The intellect decides what is true and false and this is also said only there? Where is that mind? It is a matter of speech and intellect. But the knowable element is mind? It is completely beyond speech and intellect, hence its true meaning cannot be known. Relationship -   That element in the previous verse cannot be called true? Na asat - By saying this he described the knowable element in its quality and formless form. Now in the next verse the same knowable element is described in its formless form.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
I shall declare that nature of the individual self (brahman) which is the object to be known, namely, what is to be gained by means of virtues like modesty etc., by knowing which one attains to the self which is immortal, birthless, free from old age, death and such other material alities. [The expression is split up as - Anadi = beginningless; Mat-param = having Me as the Highest.] Anadi means that which is beginningless. Indeed, there is no origination for this individual self (brahman) and for the same reason, It is endless. The Sruti also declares:  'The wise one is not born, nor dies' (Ka. U., 2.18). 'Matpara' means having Me for the Highest. Verily, it has been told:  'Know that which is other than this (lower nature), which is the life-principle, to be the highest Prakrti of Mine' (7.5). By virtue of being the body of the Lord, the nature of the self finds joy in being completely subsidiary to Him. So the Sruti declares:  'He who, dwelling in the self, is within the self, whom the self does not know, whose body the self is and who controls the self from within ৷৷.' (Br. U. Madh., 5.7.22). Similarly do the texts declare:  'He is the cause, Lord of Lords and of sense organs. He has no progenitor, nor lord' (Sve. U., 6.9); and 'He is the Lord of the Pradhana and of the individual selves, and the Lord of alities (Ibid., 6.16).

That which is conjoined with the ality of infinite dimension or extensiveness can be designated as brahman. It is different from, and not circumscribable by, the body etc. The meaning is, It is the principle which apprehends the Ksetra. Sruti also declares:  'He (i.e., the individual self) partakes of infinity' (Sve. U., 5.9). By its Karma It is circumscribed. It assumes Its infinite nature only when It is freed from the bonds of Karma. The term brahman is applied to designate the individual self as in:  'He, crossing beyond the Gunas', becomes fit for the sake of brahman' (14.26), 'I am the ground of the brahman, who is immutable and immortal' (14.27), and 'Having attained to the state of brahman, tranil, he neither grieves nor craves; regarding all beings alike, he attains supreme devotion to Me' (18.54).

It (brahman) is said to be neither being nor non-being. The terms 'being' and 'non-being' cannot signify the nature of the self because It is neither effect nor cause. For It is called 'being' (Sat) in the condition of effect when It has the form of gods etc. As It cannot possess names and forms in the condition of cause, It is said to be 'non-being' or Asat. So the Sruti texts declare:  'In the beginning, verily, this (brahman) was non-existence; therefrom the being was born' (Tai. U., 2.7.1) and 'Verily, this (brahman) was then undifferntiated. It became differentiated by names and forms' (Br. U., 1.4.7). The self's conditions as effect and cause have arisen on account of veiling by Avidya or ignorant in the form of Karma. It is not an expression of Its real nature. So, the terms 'being' and 'non-being' do not signify the nature of the self, If it is argued that, in the passage 'In the beginning, verily, this (Brahman) was non-existence' (Tai. U., 2.7.1), it is the Supreme Brahman in the state of cause that is described - even then it can be pointed out that the Supreme Brahman in causal condition has, for His body, the conscient and non-conscient entities in a subtle state, incapable of being differentiated by names and forms. Such a description is therefore valid. On the same principle the nature of Ksetra (body) and Ksetrajna (individual self) in the state of cause can also be indicated by the term 'non-being'. But this condition of the individual self has arisen due to Karma and such descriptions as 'being' and 'non-being' are applicable to the self only in the state of bondage. Its pure form cannot be signified by the terms 'being' and 'non-being'.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.13–13.18 jointly): Jneyam etc. upto visthitam.  Beginningless is  the Supreme Brahman :  by means of the attributes  (descriptions) like these, [the Bhagavat] describes the Brahman as being not separate from the Supreme Consciousness  (or action)  expressed in every utterance and  [thus] gracing  [the seeker] to infer his [or Its] own nature.  These attributes however have already been explained.  Hence what is the use of a fruitless repetition ?

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Pravaksyami, I shall speak of, fully describe just as it is; tat, that; yat, which; is jenyam, to be known. In order to interest the hearer through inducement, the Lord speaks of what its result is: Jnatva, by realizing; yat, which Knowable; asnute, one attains; amrtam, Immortality, i.e.; he does not die again. Anadimat, without beginning-one having a beginning (adi) is adimat; one not having a beginning is anadimat. What is that? The param, supreme, unsurpassable; brahma, Brahman, which is under discussion as the Knowable.
Here, some split up the phrase anadimatparam as anadi and matparam because, if the word anadimat is taken as a Bahuvrihi compound, ['That which has no (a), beginning (adi) is anadi.' Matup is used to denote possession. Since the idea of possession is a already implied in anadi, therefore matup, if added after it, becomes redundant.] then the suffix mat (matup) becomes redundant, which is undesirable. And they show a distintive meaning: (Brahman is anadi, beginningless, and is) matparam, that of which I am the supreme (para) power called Vasudeva. Trully, the redundance could be avoided in this way if that meanig were possible. But that meaning is not possible, because what is intended is to make Brahman known only through a negation of all attributes by saying, 'It is called neither being nor non-being.' It is contradictory to show a possession of a distinctive power and to negate attributes. Therefore, although matup and a bahuvrihi compound convey the same meaning of 'possession', its (matup's) use is for completing the verse. [The Commentator accepts anadimat as a nan-tatpurusa compund. If, however, the Bahuvrihi is insisted on, then the mat after anadi should be taken as completing the number of syllables needed for versification. So, nat need not be compounded with param.]
Having aroused an interest through inducement by saying, 'The Knowable which has Immortality as its result is beeing spoken of by Me,' the Lord says: Tat, that Knowable; ucyate, is called; na sat, neither being; nor is it called asat, non-being.
Objection: After strongly girding up the loins and declaring with a loud voice, 'I shall speak of the Knowable,' is it not incongruous to say, 'That is called neither being nor non-being'?
Reply: No. What has been said is surely consistent. 
Objection: How?
Reply: For in all the Upanisads, the Knowable, i.e. Brahman, has been indicated only by negation of all attributes-'Not this, not this' (Br. 4.4.22), 'Not gross, not subtle' (op. cit. 3.3.8), etc.; but not as 'That is this', for It is beyond speech.
Objection: Is it not that a thing which cannot be expressed by the word 'being' does not exist? Like-wise, if the Knowable cannot be expressed by the word 'being', It does not exist. And it is contradictory to say, 'It is the Knowable', and 'It cannot be expressed by the word "being".'
Counter-objection: As to that, no that It does not exist, because It is not the object of the idea, 'It is non-being.'
Objection: Do not all cognitions verily involve the idea of being or non-being? This being so, the Knowable should either be an object of a cognition involving the idea of existence, or it should be an object of a cognition involving the idea of non-existence.
Reply: No, because, by virtue of Its being super-sensuous, It is not an object of cognition involving either, of the two ideas. Indeed, any object perceivable by the senses, such as pot etc., can be either an object of cognition involving the idea of existence, or it can be an object of cognition involving the idea of non-existence. But this Knowable, being supersensuous and known from the scriptures, which are the sole means of (Its) knowledge, is not, like pot etc., an object of cognition involving either of the two ideas. Therefore It is called neither being nor non-being.
As for your objection that it is contradictory to say, 'It is the Knowable, but it is neither called being nor non-being,'-it is not contradictory; for the Upanisad says, 'That (Brahman) is surely different from the known and, again, It is above the unknown' (Ke. 1.4).
Objection: May it not be that even the Upanisad is contradictory in its meaning? May it not be (contradictory) as it is when, after beginning with the topic of a shed for a sacrifice, [Cf. 'Pracinavamsam karoti, he constructs (i.e. shall construct) (the sacrificial shed) with its supporting beam turned east-ward' (Tai, Sam.; also see Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Monier Williams).-Tr.] it is said, 'Who indeed knows whether there exists anything in the other world or not!' (Tai. Sam. 6.1.1)?
Reply: No, since the Upanisad speaking of something that is different from the known and the unknown is meant for establishing an entity that must be realized. [The Upanisadic text is not to be rejected on the ground that it is paradoxical, for it is meant to present Brahman as indentical with one's own inmost Self.] But, '৷৷.whether there exists anything in the other world,' etc. is merely an arthavada [See note on p. 40. Here, the passage, '৷৷.whether there exists৷৷.,' etc. is to be interpreted as an arthavada emphasizing, the need of raising a shed, irrespective of any other consideration.-Tr.] connected with an injunction.
From reason who it follows that Brahman cannot be expressed by such words as being, non-being, etc. For, every word used for expressing an object, when heard by listeners, makes them understand its meaning through the comprehension of its significance with the help of genus, action, ality and relation; not in any other way, because that is not a matter of experience. To illustrate this: a cow, or a horse, etc. (is comprehended) through genus; cooking or reading, through action; white or black, through ality; a rich person or an owner of cows, through relation. But Brahman does not belong to any genus. Hence it is not expressible by words like 'being' etc.; neither is It possessed of any alitity with the help of which It could be expressed through alifying words, for It is free from alities; nor can It be expressed by a word implying action, It being free from actions-which accords with the Upanisadic text, 'Partless, actionless, calm' (Sv. 6.19). Nor has It any relation, since It is one, non-dual, not an object of the senses, and It is the Self.
Therefore it is logical that It cannot be expressed by any word. And this follows from such Upanisadic texts as, 'From which, words trun back' (Tai. 2.4.1), etc.
Therefore it is logical that It cannot be expressed by any word. And this follows from such Upanisadic texts as, 'From which, words turn back' (Tai. 2.4.1), etc.
Since the Knowable (Brahman) is not an object of the word or thought of 'being', there arises the apprehension of Its nonexistence. Hence, for dispelling that apprehension by establishing Its existence with the help of the adjuncts in the form of the organs of all creatures, the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Is it indicated that the phrase that which is to be sacrificed to represent the two promised meanings? But what is meant by whom there? This means that by the statement of the name, the effect of the other, the eternal, etc., [13.4] is the exponent of what is promised. Some, seeing the error of the uselessness of the matupo of the fulfillment of the defined meaning by relying on the plural of adirasyasti, etc., explain that I am Vasudeva, the supreme power whose is beyond me? That’s not true? Because of the impossibility of meaning, there is no difference between Brahman and Vasudeva. Nor, by the sense that it is said to be paravarya in the incarnations, does Matupo explain that it is not vain, saying, "Adimadi. They have the beginning and the beginning? That which has no beginnings is non-beginning. That is, the body, senses, qualities, actions, etc., given by power. Or the same conflict as mentioned earlier. Nor would there be any doubt that this is a plural or a noun compound for one who considers tumapo to be a nullity, a Vedic interruption of gender, or a loss of inflection. And can it be doubted that Brahman itself is not the cause?To avoid that, he refutes those who have said that the use of matupa is for the purpose of completing the verse without stating such a purpose, since the word matubantenadi relies on the noun compound -- otherwise. That is, acceptance of the two purposes mentioned by us. This means that it is possible to fill in the verse with a meaningful change of words. Indeed, would it be wrong to use the plural again? And not so but is this just another word? That is the error of the story, since the error is also involved in the otherwise distorted [13.4]. Isn't it? since it is said as a fault to rely on much effort when it is possible to represent the intended meaning by a small word after defining the plural.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
He says that the knowable form is knowable by the six forms of its own qualities. It is accessible to the wise from the scriptures. He says that the fruit of knowledge is nectar. He refers to the knowable in terms of name, form and characteristics: the eternal, transcendental Brahman. That which is represented by all Vedanta. or that which I am beyond, and that which is the imperishable. And that is the dependence of the opposite religion, he argues, that it is neither being nor non-being. Asattva and Sattva are two opposing Dharma, and there is no contradiction between them.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
In regard to what is to be known by these means, called knowledge, he says: That which is to be known, etc., by the six. I will tell you what is to be known by the seeker of liberation, and I will tell you clearly in detail. Praising him with fruit to orient the listener, he says: If. That,knowing the knowable to be said, one attains to immortality. That is, he is freed from the world. What is that. The eternal is the eternal that does not become the eternal. The Supreme, inexhaustible Brahman, inseparable from all, is the Supreme Self-object. Here, even in the acquisition of the meaning of the plural, the use of matupa is used in the case of overlying or in the constant combination. Some desire the terms eternal and beyond Me. That is, Brahman is the unspecified form beyond Brahman with My qualities. I am Vasudeva, whose supreme power is the misinterpretation. Because the powerful nature of the unspecified Brahman is to be expressed there. He says that non-specificity is not called being or non-being. The subject of proof by the mouth of law is called true, and the subject of proof by the mouth of prohibition is called false. This, however, is distinct from both of them, since it is without distinction and in the form of self-illumination and consciousness.Because that Brahman is neither dependent on being true nor dependent on non-being, therefore it is not said by any word by the main instinct. since there is no possibility of the causes of the instinct of sound. For example, is it a cow horse or a breed? or from the verb to cook and read? White or black in quality? The word rich or cow conveys meaning in relation. Here all religion, distinct from the relations of action and quality, is collected by the term caste in the form of caste or title. Similarly, the word sky also promotes some religion in the form of word dependence etc. of the logicians. But in his own opinion, since there are many causes of the sky-persons like the earth and others, even sky-ness is a caste, and that is also the word caste. And there is no light beyond the sky, and time is not beyond God. Or in addition, the words direction and time are also causes of the instinct of a particular title, from the word caste. Therefore, from the four kinds of causes of instinct, there are only four kinds of sound. There, the prohibition of caste, that there is neither being nor non-being, is meant to characterize the prohibition of the relations of action and quality.The prohibition of caste, that there is only one and the same, is the prohibition of the order of the relationships of quality and action, that it is devoid of quality, inactive, peaceful, since it is impossible in one of its many personality. Therefore it is proper to say that Brahman is not called by any word. Then how is it that I shall explain, and how is the formula because it is the source of the scriptures? Assume that it is somehow represented by a characteristic word. And the type of representation is explained here as someone who sees it as a wonder. For details, however, see the commentary.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
What is to be known by these means, he says, is to be known by the six. I will tell you what is to be known. It shows the fruit of knowledge for the attainment of respect for the listener. Knowing what is being said, he attains immortality and liberation. What is that eternal, eternal, that it does not become eternal? The Supreme Absolute Truth. Even if the plural is proved to be without beginning by the same plural, the use of the matupa again is a chandasa. Or the two terms eternal and beyond Me. That is, Brahman, the supreme and unspecified form of My Vishnu. Tadevah. It is neither true nor false. The subject of proof by the mouth of the law is called by the word sat. The subject of prohibition is called by the word 'sat'. Is this, however, characteristic of both? Because it is non-objective.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
In the desire to know what is to be known by the word knowledge by the means of knowledge as stated above, he says: It is to be known. The subject of the instinct of realization obtained by the cultivation of the means of knowledge mentioned is to be understood. Nor is the visibility of the Brahman as the object of the instinct of the consciousness, since it is not visible even though it is knowable as the object of the instinct, in the absence of the object of the fruit. And so the scripture says that he knows what is knowable and has no knower? By whom shall the knower know in the dead, and so on. I will tell you exactly what is to be known. It orients the listener by displaying the fruit. Knowing that which is to be known, he attains liberation, which is immortal and characterized by repetition. That is, he becomes liberated. What is that, he asked. That is, the Brahman, beyond the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless, the beginningless. But what is in the cut off, which is eternal, in the sense of the plural, is matup, and the cut off is after me, because of the law that it is not applicable to the meanings mentioned in the case of meaninglessness. That is not to say that I am the supreme power called Vasudeva, which means that it is beyond Him. Since the demonstration of the existence of specific powers is indicated by the prohibition of all particulars, that neither being nor non-being is called, the meaning stated above is impossible. Therefore, even though matupo has the same meaning as multiple brihi, it is used to complete the verse in the overlying or in the daily combination.Indeed, My transcendental and unspecific form of Vishnu is transcendental to Me, or transcendental to Brahman with the modes. Or, as the Ācāryas have said thus, in the case of the possibility of the meaningfulness of the matupa, which is the same as the original and the subsequent and the original, in the cause of action beyond the original and the other. Or if the Ācāryas have said so in the case of the possibility of the meaningfulness of the matupa in the cause of the cause beyond the original and then the original and the beyond, Or if the Ācāryas have said so in the case of the possibility of the meaningfulness of the matupa in the other and the beginning of the beginning and the beyond, and take it as intended. This is one term for the measure of the various beginnings. Beyond the beginningless illusion, therefore, beyond the being with knowledge of sound and other things separated from illusion, and without the title of being a being created by knowledge, etc.I am saying that the eternal, transcendental Brahman is the fruit of knowable immortality, he says, turning to the progenitor. Since the good action is in the form of the expressed name, the false cause is the opposite. And thus that knowable is not said to be present nor is it said to be false. If, indeed, it is not said that it is inappropriately said that neither being nor non-being is said, raising it with a great throat, saying, "I will tell you what is knowable. Since the discourse in the form of a special prohibition imposed by the Supreme Brahman in the form of Self-Light, known in the scriptures as a promise, is in the form of a promise. And so the scriptures, that is, the command by neti? Coarse molecules? unprecedented, unprecedented, and so on. Thus, since the words of the knowable Brahman are visible, the instruction in the beginning of the Sruti is by the face of prohibition, not by the face of law, that this is that. If, indeed, the Brahman is expressed by the word 'existence', there is no case of non-existence like the horn of a rabbit expressed by the word 'existence' Like the rabbit's horn, Brahman does not exist, since it is not the object of intelligence. Indeed, since all intelligences are followed by non-existence and non-existence, it is not difficult to say that Brahman is inexpressible as the object of other intelligences. The transcendental Brahman, who is distinct from the objects of both intelligence, such as the sense-perceivable pot, is its poison, since it is knowable by the fact that it is accessible by sound alone. Is it a cow horse or a breed?From the phrase cooks reads? White or black in quality? The whole word cow and others conveys meaning in relation to the rich or the cow. Indeed, Brahman is not expressed by the words always and others because of caste and other things. And the heard non-clan colour? Passive quiet? Only and without quality? One and the same, and so on. Thus, because it is poisonous and self-contained, it is logical that Brahman is not called by any word in its main function. But that which is complete after the derivation of the word para from the adjective prḥ for the purpose of fulfillment is empty of three kinds of interruptions. Indeed, since, according to the Advaita view of place and time, objects are non-existent, where is the interruption of that? That is, eternal ignorance is related to the same. This means that countries and others are possible. Now, the rise of the Vedas in the act of peace distinguishes the ignorance of the doubt that the ignorance itself is accepted as the first and the second -- that it is not true. That ignorance is not called good, since it is not defined by the essence of obligation. Thus it is said that there is nothing indirectly because of its non-expression of perception.This means that Brahman is second to none by ignorance like a rope by a snake. That which is to be attributed to Brahman in this explanation because of the futility of the second negation is not said to be non-existent, nor is it indescribable. That is to be thought of, since it is defined by Sattva, meaning that only knowledge of the beginning of meaning is indescribable. Because of the impropriety of describing ignorance by promising the discourse of knowable. The direction is that the ignorant being is known and not knowable because Brahman is attributable in the aspect that it is called good, and that the contradiction is found in the scriptures such as 'Nasadasinno sadasit'

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
For the knower is already mentioned -- he and who and what effect [13.4]? He himself is again touched, and how is it to be known that I shall tell you? For the characteristic of the Self of the particular Vedic is that it is the Vedic, as stated above. Therefore, the illusion of the objectivity of the Supreme Brahman is rejected by the process of knowledge of the field and the knower of the field [13.3]? and in the middle, nature and man [13.20], since they are defined as the same? and from the statement that it is subject to the modes of transcendence and enjoyment under the senses. The word 'svarupa' indicates the definition of the neuter indication, or neuterness in relation to the word 'Brahma' to be said. For the characteristic is reversible to all others. If it is asked what else is the purification of the form of the separate form by the characteristic of being the knower? That is not only perceived as otherness by characteristics? Not all the types in the form of being and non-being again, as in the fragrant earth [T.S.2], only the inversion of water and other things is accomplished in that form? Not again the cooking form and the like?Similarly, even here, even in the name of the characteristic of knowership, the distinction of the knower as actionable and inactionable would not be accomplished. I will tell you, that is, I will tell you exactly as it is.Isn't the phrase eternal appropriate? With the intention that the meaning is accomplished by the plural even by the difference of suffix, he says: The beginning of which. That is, without eternal cause. This is the meaning of the self-hearing [Br.Su.2.3.18], meaning that it is proved by the authority. This is also the reason for the aforementioned immortality, he argues, and therefore. The proof in both cases is given by the scriptures. With the intention that this is the aforementioned collection, he says, "Here it is. The word para here is the remainder para. In order of body and remainder, the scripture says, "And so on. This replies to Shankara's statement that the use of the plural matupa in the phrase matparam, even though it has the same meaning, is for the purpose of completing the verse.Here he argues why it is the object of the living entity: the Yogi of the qualities of greatness. Here he argues how the narrowed knowledge, which is proved by the Scriptures as an atom, is greater than the body and others. He argues that greatness in the state of appearance of form is proved by the scriptures: and that. Since it is possible for the infinite nature to be disconnected, he argues that infinity is formal, and that it is disconnected from the body. This means that it is formal and contrary to the difference of states. He says of the famous use of the word Brahma even in the formal sense: even in the Self. That is why the adjective 'the Supreme Brahman' is meant to be meaningful. Here in the scripture, in many places, he shows the use of the word Brahman in the Pratyagatma itself, saying, Gunas. Brahmabhuyaya Brahmatvaya. Not even the liberated being is directly Brahman?They have come to be like Me [14.2] etc. Because of the contradiction.For I am the establishment of Brahman [14.27] refers to the Supreme Brahman as I and that establishment is Brahman and other than that and not the form of the Supreme Brahman.Isn't there a rejection of the visibility of all kinds of statements in saying that neither being nor non-being is said? contrary to his own words. Nor is there a prohibition of Sattva and Sattva? Because they are invalid. And is there no distinction between good and evil? From the combination of the prohibition of auspiciousness. Therefore, what is meant here is that it is caused by action. To indicate that this is the subject of pure form, it is said to be the Self-form. He gives the reason for the use of the words good and bad in two states: in the state of action. That binding shows the use of the subjects of the Supreme Self and others in the Sruti, and so on. Or is this, where the word false is designated, for the cause is said to be then, and the action of good is born by the word good? That is, by the difference of the scriptures of the same meaning, the words sada and others are explained as the causes of the loss of name and form, respectively, and the combination thereof. Surely there are two states of being, which are said to be false or this was before? Otherwise, since the aforementioned nature is not assumed. And by the scripture, "He created the living beings by water on the earth [M.Na. The two states are the same as the action? Not natural again. This means that the natural form is said here. Indeed, as a cause, as stated in the sky and other things [Br.Su.4.14] In this chapter, it is determined that all the words in the causal phrase, such as Sadasadavyakrita, are devoted to the Supreme Self? How is it that the word falsehood here refers to the living entity? The words good and evil are the gateways to the Supreme Soul? Therefore, it is proved that it is expressive in the being who is the door. Then, even in the pure state, the word false is obtained from the absence of the division of action, name and form. This means that the prohibition of the two states of action is implied here.,

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus, having said the form of knowledge. Thereby he states the form of the knowable by the six, knowable, etc. Shall I say that what is to be known by the means thus mentioned above in the forms of its own qualities is in effect all-pervasive? I mean, I'm telling you. He states the purpose of stating that -- knowing that one attains immortality and attains liberation. Thus promising the statement, he says of its nature: Eternal. Who has no beginning and origin like that? Beyond Me, I alone am beyond whose Brahman, who is in My place, is great and pervasive. That's what he said -- it's not true sann. If, then, it becomes untrue, he argues, doubting that it is not true. By the statement of the determination of cause and effect, Brahmanhood is asserted as unknowable.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Thus explaining the field, he explains the magical effect of the form of the knower of the field, which is said to be the effect of whatever. I will tell you what is to be known by these means of knowledge. Knowing that which is knowable, he attains immortality and liberation. He then states the nature of it -- the eternal. The original is the unmanifest, and therefore the unmanifest arose, because of the remembrance of its origin. That’s the other day and the beginning. When it has been said that there is no beginning, the constantness of flow exists even in the unmanifest and others, and when they have attained beginninglessness, it is said that they have no beginning. Or that the beginning and the beyond are beyond the beginning in the cause and effect, and that the beyond the beginning is beyond them. Therefore the other is without particularity, not the other with particularity. Brahman is free from the threefold interruption. It is not said that Sattva is Sattva like the principal atom and the like. Nor is the untruth called untruth as empty. And so the scripture says, There was nothing in us, there was always in us, and there was no dust, and there was no sky beyond us. It shows the previous prohibition of the creation of the void called empty, the principal called good, the atoms called dust, and the unmanifest, which we believe to be the other sky.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the eternal. Brahman, the spirit, beginningless and subordinate to Me, lies beyond the cause and effect of this material world.

 The Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the field. He has also explained the process of knowing the knower of the field of activities. Now He begins to explain the knowable, first the soul and then the Supersoul. By knowledge of the knower, both the soul and the Supersoul, one can relish the nectar of life. As explained in the Second Chapter, the living entity is eternal. This is also confirmed here. There is no specific date at which the jīva was born. Nor can anyone trace out the history of the jīvātmā’s manifestation from the Supreme Lord. Therefore it is beginningless. The Vedic literature confirms this: na jāyate mriyate vā vipaścit ( Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.2.18). The knower of the body is never born and never dies, and he is full of knowledge. The Supreme Lord as the Supersoul is also stated in the Vedic literature ( Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.16) to be pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patir guṇeśaḥ, the chief knower of the body and the master of the three modes of material nature. In the smṛti it is said, dāsa-bhūto harer eva nānyasvaiva kadācana. The living entities are eternally in the service of the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed by Lord Caitanya in His teachings. Therefore the description of Brahman mentioned in this verse is in relation to the individual soul, and when the word Brahman is applied to the living entity, it is to be understood that he is vijñāna-brahma as opposed to ānanda-brahma. Ānanda-brahma is the Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.