Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
iti kṣetraṃ tathā jñānaṃ jñeyaṃ coktaṃ samāsataḥ .
madbhakta etadvijñāya madbhāvāyopapadyate

Word Meanings:
इति - thus
क्षेत्रम् - the field
तथा - as well as
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
ज्ञेयम् - the knowable
च - and
उक्तम् - have been stated
समासतः - briefly
मद्भक्तः - My devotee
एतत् - this
विज्ञाय - knowing
मद्भावाय - to My being
उपपद्यते - enters.

Life Application:
Understand this brief outline of the field, knowledge, and knowable; God's devotee knowing this enters divine nature.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Thus, the field, knowledge, and the knowable have been briefly stated (by Me). Knowing this in truth, My devotee attains My state of being.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Thus the field, as well as knowledge and the knowable have been briefly stated. My devotee, knowing this, enters into My Being.

इति thus? क्षेत्रम् the field? तथा as well as? ज्ञानम् knowledge? ज्ञेयम् the knowable? च and? उक्तम् have been stated? समासतः briefly? मद्भक्तः My devotee? एतत् this? विज्ञाय knowing? मद्भावाय to My being? उपपद्यते enters.Commentary He whohas controlled his mind and organs? who has the knowledge of the field and the knowable? and who fixes his mind on Me becomes one with Me.Thus the field described above (beginning with the great elements and ending with firmness? verses 5 and 6)? knowledge described above (beginning with humility and ending with perception of the end of true knowledge in verses 7 to 11) and the knowable described in verses 12 to 17 -- these have briefly been stated.He who has singleminded devotion unto Me? who takes Me (Vaasudeva? the Supreme Lord? the omniscient? and the supreme Guru) as the Self of everything? he who thinks and feels that all that he sees? hears and touches is nothing but the Lord and he who has the right knowledge described above enters into My Being or attains release from birth and death.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Thus I have told thee in brief what Matter is, and the Self worth realising and what is Wisdom. He who is devoted to Me knows; and assuredly he will enter into Me.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
So far, whatever has been discussed in the Gita's teachings is indeed the exposition of the Vedic philosophy. The field (Ksetra) starts from the great elements (Mahabhutas) and ends with firmness (Dhriti). Knowledge (Jnana) is described from humility (Amanitva) etc. to the perception of the goal of truth-knowledge. And in the subsequent verses, the knowable (Jneya) object is indicated. Now, the question is, who is the best qualified for this knowledge? The Lord says, he who is My devotee attains My nature. But this devotion is not merely emotional love. The seeker who, through the discrimination between the field and the Knower of the field, has gained the self-experience that the one Vasudeva alone is present as the Knower of the field in all beings, is the best devotee who attains My nature. In the next verse, the description of the field and the Knower of the field is being presented in the form of Prakriti (Nature) and Purusha (Spirit).

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
This field as well as the knowledge and what is to be known, all are mentioned collectively; clearly understanding this, My devotee becomes worthy of  My state.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Thus the Ksetra, knowledge and the object of knowledge have been briefly set forth. On knowing this, My devotee becomes fit to attain My state of being.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Thus has been spoken of in brief the field as also Knowledge and the Knowable. By understanding this My devotee becomes alified for My state.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The means of knowledge (Amanitvam etc.) have been spoken of first because of their inclusion within the modifications (vikaras of the field/nature). The power/influence (of the Knowable/Self) is spoken of (later) because of its multiplicity/magnitude and its supreme utility in the practice of spiritual disciplines.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Doubting that the upcoming passage starting with 'prakriti' etc. is related to the immediately preceding text, the commentator (Shankara) recalls the distant text by saying 'there (tatra)' to show its connection with the distant text. He states that those two Prakritis are the cause of all beings, by saying 'this (etat)'. To the objection that if the two Prakritis also require another Prakriti (cause) like other beings, it would lead to infinite regress, and thus they cannot be the source of beings, he shows the beginninglessness of Prakriti and Purusha to prevent defects like the arrival of results of unperformed actions, to know the root cause of bondage, and to dispel the defect of changefulness in the Self, and shows the state of modifications being dependent on Prakriti which was described as the field, by saying 'this meaning (ayam arthah)'. He explains what was indicated by 'what its nature is' by commenting on 'prakriti...'. He explains that here the lower Prakriti of the Lord is referred to by the word 'prakriti', and the higher Prakriti, known as the Jiva, is intended by the word 'purusha', by commenting 'the Lord's (isvarasya)'. He establishes their beginninglessness by saying 'not (na)' etc. He gives the reason for it by saying 'because of the eternality of God (nityatvad isvarasya)'. To the doubt: 'How does God possess the two mentioned Prakritis?', he says 'nature... (prakriti)'. To the doubt: 'His godhood is merely His independence in creation etc. of the world, not His possession of the two Prakritis', he says 'by which (yabhyam)'. To the doubt: 'Where is the beginninglessness of the two Prakritis useful?', he says 'they (te)'. He states an alternative interpretation of another school by saying 'not (na)' etc. To the doubt: 'If they are not the root cause, whose causality should be accepted?', he says 'by that indeed (tena hi)'. He says 'if (yadi)' showing that if the two Prakritis themselves are the ultimate root cause, then the causality of God established in Upanishads and Smritis would be lost. He refutes the view that the two Prakritis are created by saying 'that is incorrect (tad asat)'. Furthermore, if God were the cause of transmigratory existence independently of the two Prakritis, then due to His independence, even the liberated souls could be put back into transmigratory existence, which cannot be prevented, thereby making the scriptures of liberation unauthoritative; therefore, He alone cannot be the cause of transmigratory existence. He says this by 'of samsara (samsarasya)'. 'Uncausedness' here implies the Supreme Being being the sole cause without depending on the two Prakritis. Moreover, if the two Prakritis were created, there would be no bondage prior to their creation, and thus no liberation which consists in separation from them; and if at some point both were absent, there would be no possibility of their re-emergence. Therefore, the two Prakritis cannot be created. He says this by 'bondage (bandha)'. He says there is no contradiction if the two Prakritis are eternal by 'in eternality (nityatve)'. He explains the absence of defect in his own view through a question, by saying 'how (katham)' etc. 'Sambhava' means the cause that brings about existence. The idea is that if Prakriti is beginningless, since modifications and qualities are its effects, the changelessness and quality-less nature of the Self are established.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Thus the field, knowledge, and the knowable have been briefly stated. My devotee, knowing this in truth, attains My state of being.

Commentary -- iti kṣetraṁ tathā jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ coktaṁ samāsataḥ: That which has been described in the fifth and sixth verses of this chapter is the field (Ksetra); the collection of means described from the seventh to the eleventh verses is knowledge (Jnana); and that described from the twelfth to the seventeenth verses is the knowable (Jneya). Thus, I have briefly described the field, knowledge, and the knowable. madbhakta etadvijñāya madbhāvāyopapadyate: My devotee, knowing the field, the knowledge in the form of the collection of means, and the knowable reality (the Supreme Self) in truth, attains My state of being. By knowing the field correctly, one's connection with the field is severed. By correctly knowing and adopting knowledge, i.e., the collection of means, body-consciousness (individuality) is eradicated. By correctly knowing the knowable reality, it is attained, which means one experiences oneness with the Supreme Reality. Connection -- In order to describe in detail the field (Ksetra) and the knower of the field (Ksetrajna) which were briefly described in the first and second verses of this chapter, the subsequent section is now commenced.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
This is a brief description of the principle of Ksetra - i.e., the text beginning with 'The great elements, the Ahankara' (13.5) and ending with 'An association' (13.6). 'Knowledge' which is the means for attaining the comprehension of the principle known as the self has been taught in the text beginning with 'Modesty' (13.7) and ending with 'Reflection for attainment of knowledge of truth' (13.11). The nature of Ksetrajna (the self) which is the object of knowledge has also been concisely taught by the text beginning with 'The beginningless brahman having Me for the Highest' (13.12) and ending with 'present in the heart of all' (13.17). My devotee, on knowing this, i.e., the truth about the Ksetra, the truth about the means for attaining the nature of the self as distinct from the Ksetra, and the truth about the Ksetrajna, becomes worthy to attain My state of being. What is called My state of being is My own nature (Svabhava), namely, the transcendence of transmigratory existence. The meaning is that he becomes worthy to attain the state of freedom for transmigratory existence.

Next (1) the beginninglessness of the conjunction between the Prakrti and the self which are completely distinct, (2) the difference in the workings of these two when they are associated with each other, and (3) the cause of this conjunction - these are treated:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Etat etc. He, who understands this traid of the Field, the knowledge and what is to be known-he alone is a devotee of Mine; and he atains My state.		
 After making this definition, the same is now examined as -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Iti, thus; uktam, has been spoken-commencing from 'I shall speak of that which is to be known' (12) and ending with 'It is spoken of as beyond darkness' (17); samasatah, in brief; the ksetram, field -beginning with the 'great elements' and ending with 'for titude' (5,6); tatha, as also; jnanam, Knowledge-beginning from 'humility' (7) and ending with 'contemplation on the Goal of the knowledge of Reality' (11); and the jneyam, Knowable.
All this has been stated by way of summarizing the purport of the Vedas and the Gita. Who is fit for this true knowledge? The answer is: madbhaktah, My devotee, who attributes the fact of being the Self of all to Me who am God, Vasudeva, the Omniscient, the supreme Teacher, (and) whose conviction has been saturated with the idea that whatever he sees, hears or touches, all that verily is Lord Vasudeva. Vijnaya, by understanding; etat, this, the aforesaid true knowledge; he upa-padyate, becomes alified; mad-bhavaya, for My State (bhava) -the State of being the supreme Self; for that State of Mine. He attains Liberation.
There in the Seventh Chapter have been presented the two aspects [Cf. 15.16-18.] of God, viz the higher and the lower, characterized as the field and the Knower of the field. And it has also been said, '(Understand thus) that all things have these as their source' (7.6). The explanation as to how creatures have the two aspects, the field and the Knower of the field, as their source is now being stated:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Objection: When Brahman is established, if there is a desire to know: 'By what means can this be grasped by the intellect?', the means should have been spoken of later. Why is it spoken of first? To this, it is said—'vikara...' (due to inclusion in modifications). The meaning is that it is spoken of immediately after as an introduction to show its inclusion among the modifications. Why was 'and what His power/influence is' [13.4] spoken of instead of 'and from what what comes into being' [13.4] first, according to the order of mention? To this, it is said—'bahutvat...' (because of multiplicity). Since the priority of multiplicity can vary, as in the analogy of making a needle and a cauldron, another reason is stated. For, the means of knowledge are of supreme utility in grasping the extraordinary power/glory of the Lord in the intellect, but not so much in experiencing the worldly impelling force; to indicate this, the power/glory is spoken of immediately after the means of knowledge, and in that context. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
In the beginning, both Prakriti and Purusha were indeed the Supreme Self. Establishing that form, it is declared as the Imperishable (Akshara). The reality of the field (Ksetra) has been briefly stated by 'the great elements, egoism' (13.5) ending with 'the association, consciousness, firmness' (13.6). Knowledge (Jnana) has been described by 'humility' (13.7) ending with 'perception of the goal of truth-knowledge' (13.11). The knowable (Jneya) is also spoken of as the means of knowledge of the Self, and the imperishable nature (Aksharatva) of Brahman, the knowable, has been briefly described by 'beginningless, supreme...' (13.12) ending with 'seated in the heart of all' (13.17). My devotee, understanding all this, becomes qualified for My state of being, meaning he becomes possessed of My divine attributes.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He summarizes the field etc. spoken of, stating the qualified person and the result, by saying 'iti ksetram'. 'Iti' means in the manner described before, the field (starting from the great elements and ending with firmness), and knowledge (starting from humility and ending with perception of the goal of truth-knowledge), and the knowable (starting from beginningless, supreme Brahman and ending with seated in the heart of all) — these three have been drawn from the Upanishads and Smritis and briefly stated by Me for the grace of slow-witted seekers. For, this much indeed is the entire import of the Vedas and the Gita. And for this, My devotee, whose characteristics were described in the previous chapter, is the only qualified person. He says this by 'madbhakta'. 'My devotee' means one who has surrendered his entire self to Me, the Lord Vasudeva, the Supreme Guru, taking sole refuge in Me. He, knowing this aforesaid field, knowledge, and the knowable by discrimination, 'attains My state of being', which is the state of Supreme Bliss free from all evils, i.e., liberation; he becomes fit to attain liberation. For the Shruti says: 'To that high-souled one who has supreme devotion to God, and as much to the Guru as to God, these truths that have been spoken shine forth' (Svetasvatara Upanishad 6.23). Therefore, one who desires the supreme goal of life should always take sole refuge in Me, abandon the desire for trivial worldly pleasures, and follow the means of self-knowledge. This is the import.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He summarizes the field etc. spoken of, along with the qualified person and the result, by saying 'iti'. Thus, the field (starting from the great elements and ending with firmness), and knowledge (starting from humility and ending with perception of the goal of truth-knowledge), and the knowable (starting from beginningless, supreme Brahman and ending with seated/pervaded in all) — all this, which was spoken of in detail by Vasistha and others, has been briefly described by Me. And My devotee, who possesses the characteristics described in the previous chapter, knowing this, becomes qualified for My state of being, which is Brahman-hood.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having established the promised topic, He summarizes it by 'iti'. Thus, the field (starting from the great elements and ending with firmness), and knowledge (starting from humility and ending with perception of the goal of truth-knowledge), and the knowable (starting from 'what is to be known' [13.12] and ending with 'is said to be beyond darkness' [13.17]) has been spoken. The opinion of modern commentators that it ends with 'seated in the heart of all' is not to be accepted, because it has been shown to be inconsistent for knowledge etc. to refer to the exposition of the knowable. What was sung in detail by Vasistha and others has been described by My briefly. For, this much indeed is the import of all Vedas and the Gita; therefore, the Lord has summarized and spoken it. To the question: 'Who is qualified for the aforesaid right vision?', He says: My devotee — one who has surrendered his entire self to Me, the Lord of all, the Omniscient, the Supreme Guru, Lord Vasudeva, with a mind possessed by the conviction that whatever he hears, touches, sees, tastes, or smells is all indeed the Lord Vasudeva. Such a devotee, knowing the reality of this aforesaid field, knowledge, and the knowable, becomes qualified for My state of being, which is the state of the Supreme Self, i.e., liberation. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Summarizing, He states the fruit of the knowledge of the aforesaid reality in this verse beginning with 'iti'. Since the word 'etat' (this), which refers to the topic under discussion, has no specific qualifier, he (Ramanuja) explains it as referring to the three topics under discussion, by saying 'the truth of the field (ksetra-yathatmya)' etc. Regarding 'madbhavaya' (My state), in order to dispel the illusion of absolute identity (tadatmya) which is contradicted by Upanishadic texts declaring similarity (samya-shruti) between the soul and the Lord, he explains it as 'My nature (svabhava)'. To distinguish this from the eternally established nature of knowledge etc. of the soul, he describes it as 'transcendence of transmigratory existence (asamsaritvam)'. The word 'upapadyate' is shown to imply the fitness produced by knowledge, by using the word 'upapannah' (qualified).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He summarizes by 'iti'. 'Iti' means in this manner, the field by 'the great elements...' (13.5) etc., knowledge by 'humility...' (13.7) etc., and the knowable by 'beginningless, supreme Brahman...' (13.12) etc., and by the word 'cha' (and), all this which is of the nature of the Imperishable (Akshara), has been spoken briefly (samasatah) for ease of understanding. He states the purpose for which this was spoken by 'madbhakta'. My devotee, knowing this aforesaid form, specifically understanding it to be of the nature of My manifestation and the Imperishable, and being devoted to My worship, 'attains My state of being', meaning he becomes qualified or capable of attaining My essential nature of divine love/being. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He summarizes the range of topics spoken of by 'iti'. The field starts from the great elements and ends with firmness. Knowledge is the means of knowledge starting from humility and ending with perception of the goal of truth-knowledge. The knowable starts from beginningless, supreme Brahman and ends with seated/pervaded in all. This has been briefly stated from the Vedas and Smritis. My devotee, knowing these three, 'attains My state of being', meaning he becomes united with the state of Brahman. Brahman is attainable only through devotion, and on attaining it, one becomes Brahman itself. For the Shruti says: 'To that high-souled one who has supreme devotion to God, and as much to the Guru as to God, these truths that have been spoken shine forth' (Svetasvatara Upanishad 6.23). And also: 'He who knows Brahman becomes Brahman itself' (Mundaka Upanishad 3.2.9).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable have been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understand this thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.

 The Lord has described in summary the body, knowledge and the knowable. This knowledge is of three things: the knower, the knowable and the process of knowing. Combined, these are called vijñāna, or the science of knowledge. Perfect knowledge can be understood by the unalloyed devotees of the Lord directly. Others are unable to understand. The monists say that at the ultimate stage these three items become one, but the devotees do not accept this. Knowledge and development of knowledge mean understanding oneself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We are being led by material consciousness, but as soon as we transfer all consciousness to Kṛṣṇa’s activities and realize that Kṛṣṇa is everything, then we attain real knowledge. In other words, knowledge is nothing but the preliminary stage of understanding devotional service perfectly. In the Fifteenth Chapter this will be very clearly explained. Now, to summarize, one may understand that verses 6 and 7, beginning from mahā-bhūtāni and continuing through cetanā dhṛtiḥ, analyze the material elements and certain manifestations of the symptoms of life. These combine to form the body, or the field of activities. And verses 8 through 12, from amānitvam through tattva-jñānārtha-darśanam, describe the process of knowledge for understanding both types of knower of the field of activities, namely the soul and the Supersoul. Then verses 13 through 18, beginning from anādi mat-param and continuing through hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam, describe the soul and the Supreme Lord, or the Supersoul. Thus three items have been described: the field of activity (the body), the process of understanding, and both the soul and the Supersoul. It is especially described here that only the unalloyed devotees of the Lord can understand these three items clearly. So for these devotees Bhagavad-gītā is fully useful; it is they who can attain the supreme goal, the nature of the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa. In other words, only devotees, and not others, can understand Bhagavad-gītā and derive the desired result.