Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
traiguṇyaviṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna .
nirdvandvo nityasattvastho niryogakṣema ātmavān

Word Meanings:
त्रैगुण्यविषयाः - deal with the three
वेदाः - the Vedas
निस्त्रैगुण्यः - without these three attributes
भव - be
अर्जुन - O Arjuna
निर्द्वन्द्वः - free from duality
नित्यसत्त्वस्थः - firmly established in pure goodness
निर्योगक्षेमः - free from acquisition and preservation
आत्मवान् - established in the Self.

Life Application:
Rise above the emotional pendulum of attraction and aversion by remaining centered in your true self.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Arjuna, the subject matter of the Vedas is related to the three gunas (of Nature, i.e., the world). Become one who has transcended the three gunas, free from the pairs of opposites, established in eternal Sattva (purity), free from concern for acquisition and preservation (yogakshema), and be established in the Self.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The Vedas deal with the three attributes (of Nature); be thou above these three attributes. O Arjuna, free yourself from the pairs of opposites, and ever remain in the ality of Sattva (goodness), freed from (the thought of) acisition and preservation, and be established in the Self.

त्रैगुण्यविषयाः deal with the three attributes? वेदाः the Vedas? निस्त्रैगुण्यः without these three attributes? भव be? अर्जुन O Arjuna निर्द्वन्द्वः free from the pairs of opposites? नित्यसत्त्वस्थः ever remaining in the Sattva (goodness)? निर्योगक्षेमः free from (the thought of) acisition and preservation? आत्मवान् established in the Self.Commentary Guna means attribute or ality. It is substance as well as ality. Nature (Prakriti) is made up of three Gunas? viz.? Sattva (purity? light or harmony)? Rajas (passion or motion) and Tamas (darkness or inertia). The pairs of opposites are heat and cold? pleasure and pain? gain and loss? victory and defeat? honour and dishonour? praise and censure. He who is anxious about new acuqisitions or about the preservation of his old possessions cannot have peace of mind. He is ever restless. He cannot concentrate or meditate on the Self. He cannot practise virtue. Therefore? Lord Krishna advises Arjuna that he should be free from the thought of acisition and preservation of things. (Cf.IX.20?21).

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The Vedic Scriptures tell of the three constituents of life - the Qualities. Rise above all of them, O Arjuna, above all the pairs of opposing sensations; be steady in truth, free from worldly anxieties and centered in the Self.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Beings are constituted, in varying proportions, of the three gunas -- Sattva, Rajas and Tamas -- and the mind and intellect function only through these three gunas. To go beyond the three gunas means to go beyond the mind. If a vessel is made of an alloy of copper, zinc and tin, then to ask that these three metals be separated from it is really to ask that the vessel itself be destroyed. The Upanishads teach the seeker to go beyond the mind so that he may know God as identical with his own Self. Because this clear teaching of the Upanishads was often misunderstood, many turned away from the true religion, and hence the Gita calls for a spiritual renaissance. The same Upanishadic truth is restated here in different words: Arjuna, become one who has transcended the three gunas.

If a physician prescribes a medicine that is available nowhere in the world, his prescription is useless. Likewise, the exhortation to go beyond the three gunas for Self-realisation, however noble, is meaningless unless the practice by which it is to be accomplished is also explained. Knowledge, activity and inertia are respectively the marks of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.

The second line of the verse describes the discipline for rising above the three gunas and abiding in boundless bliss -- the same teaching of equanimity given earlier, restated here in other words. Pleasure and pain, heat and cold, gain and loss and the like are the dualities of life's experience; to remain even-minded amidst them, free from their hold, is to be nirdvandva.

Nityasattvastha: of the three gunas, Sattva is the subtlest and by nature pure, yet it too becomes tinged by the sorrow-producing Rajas and the delusion-producing Tamas. Delusion means failure to perceive a thing as it truly is (veiling), on account of which the thing is experienced in a distorted form (projection), the result of which is grief. Hence to abide in Sattva means to abide in the peace born of discrimination; and to become established in Sattva calls for constant, vigilant effort.

Niryogakshema: here yoga means acquiring what is not possessed, and kshema means protecting what has been acquired. All human effort is directed to yoga and kshema; in these two words are comprehended the actions of all beings in the world. In other words, actions driven by ego and self-interest are governed by yoga and kshema, and these two are also the source of man's anxieties and distractions. To become free of yoga and kshema is to give up both, whereby freedom from anxiety is gained at once.

It is easy to advise one to become nirdvandva and niryogakshema, but for the seeker such knowledge is of use only when the practical method of living it is also taught. That method is indicated here in the words atmavan bhava. The sorrow and pain born of dualities and of yoga-kshema afflict us only so long as we identify ourselves with body, mind and intellect, giving rise to excess of ego and self-interest. To give up this identification with these not-Self limitations, and to remain constantly aware of one's own pure conscious nature distinct from them, is what is meant by atmavan -- being established in one's own true Self. When this is accomplished, egoism is destroyed and the seeker, having gone beyond the three gunas, becomes established in the Self. For such a perfected being the Vedas serve no further purpose; indeed, it is because of the existence of the man of realisation that the authority of the words of the Veda comes to be established.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The Vedas bind by means of the three Strands.  [Hence]  O Arjuna,  you must be free from the three Strands,  free from the pairs [of opposites];  be established in this eternal Being;  be free from [the idea of]  acisition and preservation; and be possessed of the Self.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The Vedas have the three Gunas for their sphere, O Arjuna. You must be free from the three Gunas and be free from the pairs of opposites. Abide in pure Sattva; never care to acire things and to protect what has been acired, but be established in the self.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Arjuna, the Vedas [Meaning only the portion dealing with rites and duties (karma-kanda).] have the three alities as their object. You become free from worldliness, free from the pairs of duality, ever-poised in the ality of sattva, without (desire for) acisition and protection, and self-collected.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
[Krishna] states the yoga-buddhi (the intellect of yoga) through the verse beginning 'traigunyavisaya...' Having first set aside another view, he explains that since the Vedas speak indirectly (paroksha), their meaning appears, as it were, to relate only to heaven and other results connected with the three gunas -- for it has been said 'this Veda speaks indirectly.' Hence the sense is: do not be deluded by this apparent (surface) meaning. It has been said that a discourse is spoken with a view to the one addressed; the position of the Veda [as pointing to the Supreme] itself is not thereby negated. For it is said: 'In the Veda, in the Ramayana, in the Puranas, and in the Mahabharata, Vishnu is glorified everywhere, at the beginning, at the end and in the middle' (Katha 2.15); 'The whole Veda is the root of dharma, [as understood] by the tradition and conduct of those who know it, and by the liking of the good and of one's own self' (Manu 2.16); 'Dharma is that which is ordained by the Veda, and its opposite is adharma' (Bhag. 6.1.40). Thus, since it is declared that the Vedas in their entirety are devoted to Vishnu, and that what is enjoined by them and what is opposed to them are respectively called dharma and adharma, [that is established].

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Anticipating the doubt that even for the unenlightened who are given to Vedic study, discriminative wisdom (viveka) might arise, he says 'ya evam.' Then, anticipating the objection that since the Veda concerns desire-objects (kama), attachment to desire (kamatmata) might itself be praiseworthy according to the Veda, he says 'nistraigunya.' The word 'become' (bhava) is to be connected with each of the qualifying terms such as 'nirdvandva' etc. Taking traigunya to mean the aggregate characterized by the connection of the three gunas -- Sattva and the rest -- with meritorious and sinful action and their results, he explains it as 'samsara' (the cycle of worldly life). Here the word 'Veda' refers specifically to the ritual portion (karma-kanda); since those given to its practice have no occasion for discrimination, being bound to the continuity of samsara through the performance of its prescribed ends -- this is the meaning. Then, anticipating the question 'what then should be done, for the sake of discrimination, in order to abandon samsara?' he says 'tvam tu' (but you). Anticipating the objection that saying 'become free of the three gunas' (nistraigunya), which prescribes freedom from all three gunas, would conflict with the following clause 'be ever-established in Sattva' (nityasattvastha), he explains it as meaning 'be free from desire' (niskama). 'Sapratipaksatva' means mutual opposition, exemplified by pairs such as heat and cold. Having stated the reason for freedom from desire as freedom from the pairs of opposites, i.e., forbearance of heat, cold and the like, and, anticipating the further need for a reason for that too, he gives the reason as constant reliance on the quality of Sattva -- hence 'nitya.' Anticipating the objection that it would be impossible to rest solely in Sattva untouched by Rajas and Tamas for one whose mind is occupied with acquisition and preservation (yoga-kshema), he says 'tatha' (likewise). Anticipating the question as to what basis there is for enjoining freedom from yoga-kshema, given that yoga and kshema, being the means of livelihood, serve as means to the ends of man, he says 'yoga.' Anticipating the objection that since concern for yoga-kshema is natural to all, it would be impossible to relinquish it, he says 'atmavan' (self-possessed). Freedom from heedlessness (apramada) means freedom from being overpowered by sense-objects. Finally, as to whether this teaching, being meant for one seeking liberation, is here intended for Arjuna as one seeking liberation, he says 'this' -- indicating that it is not so.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The Vedas describe only the actions of the three gunas; O Arjuna, be free from the three gunas, be free from the dualities, be ever established in the eternal Reality, the Supreme, do not even wish for yoga-kshema (acquisition and preservation), and be devoted entirely to the Supreme.

Explanation -- 'Traigunya-vishaya vedah' -- Here by 'the Vedas' is meant that portion of the Vedas which describes the three gunas and the fruits of the three gunas, namely the regions of heavenly enjoyment and the like.
The purport of these words is not to disparage the Vedas but to glorify the state of desirelessness. Just as when describing a diamond one may also describe glass, the purpose is not to disparage glass but to extol the diamond; similarly here, the description of the desire-driven aspect of the Vedas is given only to glorify the state of desirelessness, not to condemn the Vedas. Nor is it true that the Vedas describe only the world, which is the product of the three gunas; the Vedas also describe the Supreme and the means to attain Him.
'Nistraigunyo bhavarjuna' -- O Arjuna, give up the desire for the world, which is the product of the three gunas, and become one who is beyond the world, i.e., rise above it.

'Nirdvandvah' -- To rise above the world, it is essential to be free from the dualities such as attachment and aversion, for these are truly man's enemies, i.e., they are what entangle him in the world (Gita 3.34). Therefore, be free from all dualities. Why does the Lord command Arjuna to become free from dualities? Because the dualities cause delusion and entanglement in the world (Gita 7.27). Only when the seeker is free from dualities can he worship with steadiness (Gita 7.28). Freedom from dualities releases one easily from worldly bondage (Gita 5.3); it dispels delusion (Gita 15.5); and one who is free from dualities is not bound even while performing action (Gita 4.22). In short, the seeker's sadhana becomes firm only through freedom from dualities; hence the Lord commands Arjuna to be free from them.

Furthermore, if there is attachment to any object or person in the world, aversion to some other object or person will inevitably follow -- this is the rule. Even indifference to God is, in this sense, a form of aversion. But when the seeker develops love for God, there is no aversion to the world; rather, a natural detachment (uparati) from the world arises. The first stage of this detachment is that the seeker feels no aversion even amid unfavourable circumstances, but only indifference; indifference is followed by dispassion, and dispassion by true detachment, in which attachment and aversion are wholly effaced. Looked at closely, in indifference the impressions (samskaras) of attachment and aversion still remain; in dispassion their potency still remains; but in true detachment neither the impressions nor the potency remain -- attachment and aversion are altogether absent.

'Nityasattvasthah' -- The means of becoming free from dualities is this: remain ever established in that eternal, all-pervading Supreme Reality which alone truly exists.

'Niryogakshemah' -- Do not even desire yoga and kshema (acquisition and preservation); for the Lord Himself bears the yoga-kshema of those who are devoted solely to Him (Gita 9.22).

'Atmavan' -- Become devoted solely to the Supreme; keep the attainment of the Supreme alone as your goal.

Connection -- What results from becoming free of the three gunas, free from dualities, and so on, is told in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The word Traigunya means the three Gunas - Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Here the term Traigunya denotes persons in whom Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are in abundance. The Vedas in prescribing desire-oriented rituals (Kamya-karmas) have such persons in view. Because of their great love, the Vedas teach what is good to those in whom Tamas, Rajas and Sattva preponderate. If the Vedas had not explained to these persons the means for the attainment of heaven etc., according to the Gunas, then those persons who are not interested in liberation owing to absence of Sattva and preponderance of Rajas and Tamas in them, would get completely lost amidst what should not be resorted to, without knowing the means for attaining the results they desire. Hence the Vedas are concerned with the Gunas. Be you free from the three Gunas. Try to acire Sattva in abundance; increase that alone. The purport is:  do not nurse the preponderance of the three Gunas in their state of inter-mixture; do not cultivate such preponderance.

Be free from the pairs of opposites; be free from all the characteristics of worldly life. Abide in pure Sattva; be established in Sattva, in its state of purity without the admixture of the other two Gunas. If it is estioned how that is possible, the reply is as follows. Never care to acire things nor protect what has been acired. While abandoning the acisition of what is not reired for self-realisation, abandon also the conservation of such things already acired. You can thus be established in self-control and thery become an aspirant after the essentail nature of the self. 'Yoga' is acisition of what has not been acired; 'Ksema' is preservation of things already acired. Abandoning these is a must for an aspirant after the essential nature of the self. If you conduct yourself in this way, the preponderance of Rajas and Tamas will be annihilated, and pure Sattva will develop.

Besides, all that is taught in the Vedas is not fit to be utilised by all.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Traigunya-etc.  The Vedas bind  very much [only] by means of the three Strands and they do not bind on their own accord.  For, the rituals prescribed in the Vedas, create bondage if they are performed with an intention of pleasure, or of (avoiding) pain, or with an illlusion of attachment.  Hence the traid of Strands in the form of desire (or in a pleasing form) must be abandoned.
 
If the present passage were intended to condemn the Vedas, then the act of fighting the battle in estion would be spoiled, because there is nothing other than the Vedas do not bind those, from whom the desire for fruit has completely gone.	
 Because the Vedas alone are useful for proper knowledge in the case of those persons [free from the Strands] hence [the Lord] says-

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
To those who are thus devoid of discriminating wisdom, who indulge in pleasure, [Here Ast. adds 'yat phalam tad aha, what result accrues, that the Lord states:'-Tr.] O Arjuna, vedah, the Vedas; traigunya-visayah, have the three alities as their object, have the three gunas, [Traigunya means the collection of the three alities, viz sattva (purity), rajas (energy) and tamas (darkness); i.e. the collection of virtuous, vicious and mixed activities, as also their results. In this derivative sense traigunya means the worldly life.] i.e. the worldly life, as the object to be revealed. But you bhava, become; nistraigunyah, free from the three alities, i.e. be free from desires. [There is a seeming conflict between the advices to be free from the three alities and to be ever-poised in the ality of sattva. Hence, the Commentator takes the phrase nistraigunya to mean niskama, free from desires.] (Be) nirdvandvah, free from the pairs of duality  by the word dvandva, duality, are meant the conflicting pairs [Of heat and cold, etc.] which are the causes of happiness and sorrow; you become free from them. [From heat, cold, etc. That is, forbear them.]
You become nitya-sattvasthah, ever-poised in the ality of sattva; (and) so also niryoga-ksemah, without (desire for) acisition and protection. Yoga means acisition of what one has not, and ksema means the protection of what one has. For one who as 'acisition and protection' foremost in his mind, it is difficult to seek Liberation. Hence, you be free from acisition and protection. And also be atmavan, self-collected, vigilant. This is the advice given to you while you are engaged in your own duty. [And not from the point of view of seeking Liberation.]

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
As in the earlier group of four verses [Krishna] has not yet stated the yoga he promised, so too here, [it might be thought] this very verse beginning 'traigunya' does not state it either. To remove this misconception, [the commentator] says 'tam' -- referring to that which was promised. By the word 'adi' (etc.) it is indicated that [the promise] runs up to a further point, for the promise is renewed again at the beginning of the seventh [chapter]. Then, to remove the minor doubt as to why, immediately after the promise, [Krishna] did not state it at once, [the commentator] says 'itarat' (the other topic) -- having first set aside the other topic that stood in the way of the direct statement, the promised matter is now taken up; otherwise, being interrupted by that other discourse, there would be no scope for it. Alternatively, this indicates a twofold arrangement in the verses to come: by some verses what is opposed to yoga is set aside, and by others yoga itself is taught. As to the verses 'The Vedas have the three gunas as their object; but you become free of the three gunas' -- lest it be misunderstood as enjoining total abandonment of the Vedas, [the commentator] explains 'of the Vedas...' in the sense of 'related to the three gunas,' by a secondary derivation meaning 'belonging to that.' 'Sambandhi' means 'the effect of that.' 'Pratititah' means 'at first sight, apparently.' 'Arthah' means 'the intended sense and purpose.' As to why the Vedas have an indirect (paroksa) sense, he explains: since this is so, because of the possibility of misplaced certainty, one should not fall into the confusion likely to arise. To the objection 'let the apparent sense alone stand,' he replies that the final settled conclusion is that the literal sense of the Veda, taken as final, is indeed to be set aside, since it would conflict with yoga; hence it is called the correct conclusion. Why so? Because 'the Veda is the root of dharma' -- the source from which the knowledge of dharma is derived; and the knowers of the Veda -- Manu and others -- their texts, their inner disposition, and conduct grounded in the sense of dharma, along with the liking of the mind in matters of option, are enjoined or prohibited accordingly. If the Veda truly conflicted with the intended yoga, the Smriti-based conclusion would have to be rejected in respect of the Veda -- but this is not so; rather, Smriti is entirely in accord with it. Here the word 'dharma' refers specifically to the dharma of renunciation (nivrtti-dharma).

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Lord Himself states the purport of the Vedas: 'traigunya-visaya vedah' -- since this is so, for those who are desire-ridden and qualified only for the three gunas, the Vedas -- even though divided into three sections -- have as their object the fruits pertaining to the three gunas. Therefore you, Arjuna, be established in that Reality which is free of the three gunas and which is the very root of the Vedas. One who is established in the three gunas is 'traigunya'; one distinct from that, free from the three gunas, is 'nistraigunya.' The hidden purport is: become one established in Me, who am free from the three gunas.

He states the mark of this in 'nirdvandva' etc. Since it is said that endurance of the three kinds of suffering is fortitude, and one ever established in fortitude, i.e., in Sattva, with the mind fixed solely on Sattva -- the hidden intent is: become one devoted to the Lord, who is of the nature of eternal Sattva.

The attainment, by one's own effort, of what is unattained is 'yoga'; the preservation of what is attained is 'kshema.' Freedom from these is stated in accordance with ordinary usage. But in truth, what is indicated by 'niryogakshema' is that for the devotee of the Lord whose mind is fixed solely on Sattva, in accordance with the path of bhakti-yoga, yoga-kshema is entirely dependent on the Lord. This very point will be stated ahead: 'for those ever devoted to Me, I Myself bear their yoga-kshema' (9.22). 'Atmavan' means one whose mind is under the control of the Self, in this sense.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
[Objection:] Let it be that for those with desire, owing to the fault in their disposition, no determinate resolve arises; but for the desireless, who perform action with a determinate resolve, since action is by nature productive of results such as heaven, the obstruction to knowledge would be the same for both -- anticipating this doubt, [Krishna] says: 'Traigunya' means the action born of the three gunas, i.e., samsara rooted in desire, which alone is set forth as the object -- such are the Vedas, i.e., that portion concerned with ritual action; they make known to each person only the fruit desired by that very person. For it is not the case that mere prescription results, upon a single performance, in the attainment of every fruit for everyone; rather, in the absence of the corresponding desire, whichever fruit is desired at the time of undertaking the rite, that alone is the fruit of that performance. Since, therefore, in the absence of desire there is no fruit, you, O Arjuna, become nistraigunya, i.e., desireless. By this, samsara understood as the natural product of action is set aside.

[Objection:] Since garments etc. are sought as a remedy against the dualities of cold and heat, how can desirelessness be maintained? To this he replies: 'nirdvandvah' -- become one who endures the dualities of cold and heat and the like.

[Question:] But how is unbearable suffering to be endured? To this he replies: 'nityasattvasthah' -- 'nitya' means constant, unwavering; 'sattva' here is a synonym for fortitude; one who abides in that is so called. For one whose Sattva is overpowered by Rajas and Tamas, thinking 'I shall die from the affliction of cold, heat, etc.,' turns away from dharma; but you should, overpowering Rajas and Tamas, take refuge in Sattva alone.

[Objection:] Even while enduring cold and heat, something unacquired must still be acquired, and what is acquired must be protected, for the sake of remedying hunger, thirst, etc. -- so how, while making effort for this, can one remain established in Sattva? To this he replies: 'niryogakshemah' -- the attainment of what is unattained is yoga; the protection of what is attained is kshema; be free from these, i.e., free of possessions that cause distraction of mind. Nor should you be anxious, thinking 'how then shall I live?' -- for the Supreme Lord, the inner controller of all, will Himself see to your yoga-kshema and the rest. This is conveyed by 'atmavan' -- one for whom the Self exists both as the object of meditation and as the sustainer of yoga-kshema, is called atmavan. Having ascertained that He alone will supply whatever is needed merely for the maintenance of the body, become free of anxiety -- this is the meaning. Or, atmavan may also mean one who is vigilant, free from heedlessness.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
[Objection:] If heaven and the like are not the ultimate fruit, then why are actions enjoined by the Vedas as means to them? To this he replies: 'traigunya-visaya' -- the Vedas, in respect of those qualified persons who are of the nature of the three gunas and who are desirous of fruits, teach the connection between action and its fruit for such persons. But you, be nistraigunya, i.e., desireless. He states the means to this: 'nirdvandvah' -- dualities such as pleasure-pain, heat-cold, and the like are called dvandva; be free from them, i.e., endure them. How? To this he replies: 'nityasattvasthah' -- being ever established, i.e., resorting to fortitude. Likewise, 'niryogakshemah' -- the acceptance of what is unattained is yoga, the preservation of what is attained is kshema; be free from these. 'Atmavan' means vigilant, free from heedlessness. For one who is disturbed by dualities and preoccupied with yoga-kshema, and who is heedless, transcendence of the three gunas is indeed not possible.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
For those devoted to Vedic discourse, who take the fruit to be samsara consisting of the three gunas as taught by the Veda, [Krishna] says: 'traigunya' -- samsara is the object, i.e., the subject-matter, of the Vedas devoted to ritual action. Then, [Arjuna] wondering 'how, then, should I be?', [Krishna] says 'nistraigunya' -- become desireless. By addressing him as 'O Arjuna,' [Krishna] suggests that he ought to make his very name meaningful. He states the means to becoming desireless: 'nirdvandvah' -- the mutually opposed things that are the cause of pleasure and pain are termed dvandva; be free from them. He states the means to that: 'nityasattvasthah' -- be ever established in Sattva. He states the means to that too: 'niryogakshemah' -- the acquisition of what is unattained is yoga, the protection of what is attained is kshema; free from these, i.e., free from the guna of Rajas. 'Atmavan' means free from heedlessness, i.e., free from the guna of Tamas.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this shloka.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
[Objection:] Those who are ignorant engage in what is taught by the Veda; but if there is no fruit such as heaven, how does the Veda then instruct? Anticipating this, he says 'traigunya-visaya veda' -- 'traigunya' refers to the beings created within the creation governed by the three gunas; the Vedas, addressed to them, teach actions yielding fruits such as heaven for their sake. They do not, however, concern themselves with the devotees of the Lord who belong to His own transcendent creation, meant for His sport, and who are beyond the gunas. The Lord's sportive creation is itself free from the gunas; hence it is said, 'that is indeed a different creation, distinct from that of the Creator' (Sri Varaha's statement). The very nature of the Supreme Person beyond the gunas is, moreover, altogether beyond the reach of the Vedas; hence the Shruti says 'not this, not this' (Br.Up. 2.3.6), 'from which words turn back' (Tai.Up. 2.4, 2.9.1), and so forth. Since the Vedas concern the three gunas, therefore you become nistraigunya, i.e., become a devotee of that which is beyond the three gunas -- this is the meaning. Or else, 'the Vedas have the three gunas as their object' may mean that they teach a nature and fruit that is only apparently constituted of the three gunas, and not the direct relationship with the Lord.

[Objection:] But if the Vedas concern only the three gunas, what then is the resort of the ignorant like us? Anticipating this, he says 'nistraigunya' -- become devoted solely to My nature which is beyond the gunas. By what means can this be achieved? Anticipating this, he says 'nirdvandvah' -- free from the dualities such as pleasure-pain, 'I'-and-'mine', and the like; be free of these, i.e., abandoning everything, be devoted to bhakti. And how should you yourself be? Anticipating this, he says 'nityasattvasthah' -- be established in that which is eternal Being, i.e., in that which is beyond the gunas. Further, 'niryogakshemah' -- the desire for an unattained but attainable object through effort is yoga; the acceptance, through the knowledge that a desired object has been already attained, is kshema; free from these, atmavan means possessed of Self-knowledge -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
[Question:] For whom, then, does the intellect become fit for concentration (samadhi)? Anticipating this, he says 'traigunya' -- traigunya is the outcome of the three gunas, in the form of the upward, middle, and downward courses of transmigration; the Vedas devoted to that as their object, i.e., devoted chiefly to ritual action, are meant here. But you, become nistraigunya -- become detached even from the upward course, i.e., attainment of heaven. This will also be stated later: 'those established in Sattva go upward' etc. The sense is that one who is detached even from divine objects of enjoyment becomes qualified for samadhi.

What is the mark of such a nistraigunya person? Anticipating this, he says 'nirdvandvah' -- pleasure and pain, honour and dishonour, friend and foe, heat and cold, and the like are the dualities, consisting of mutually opposed pairs; free from these is nirdvandva -- meaning one who has equanimity toward all.

[Objection:] But how can afflicting things such as heat be endured just like cold and the like? Anticipating this, he says 'nityasattvasthah' -- ever, i.e., always, resorting to Sattva, i.e., to fortitude, or to the guna of Sattva. For the resolute person is indeed capable of enduring everything; or the one established in Sattva, knowing that this suffering, brought about by prarabdha karma, is unavoidable, why then be distressed -- thus knowing, he is able to endure everything.

[Objection:] But how can the utterly unbearable suffering of hunger and the like be endured by one who is nistraigunya, entirely without activity? Anticipating this, he says 'niryogakshemah' -- the attainment of what is unattained is yoga; the protection of what is attained is kshema; since these two are also dependent on prarabdha karma, one is free of them too -- this is the meaning. The reason for this is: 'atmavan,' i.e., one whose mind is conquered, self-possessed. Such a person indeed remains undisturbed in all calamities, ever content, and free from exertion -- you too should become such a nistraigunya person -- this is the sense.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The Vedas deal mainly with the subject of the three modes of material nature. O Arjuna, become transcendental to these three modes. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established in the self.

 All material activities involve actions and reactions in the three modes of material nature. They are meant for fruitive results, which cause bondage in the material world. The Vedas deal mostly with fruitive activities to gradually elevate the general public from the field of sense gratification to a position on the transcendental plane. Arjuna, as a student and friend of Lord Kṛṣṇa, is advised to raise himself to the transcendental position of Vedānta philosophy where, in the beginning, there is brahma-jijñāsā, or questions on the supreme transcendence. All the living entities who are in the material world are struggling very hard for existence. For them the Lord, after creation of the material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how to live and get rid of the material entanglement. When the activities for sense gratification, namely the karma-kāṇḍa chapter, are finished, then the chance for spiritual realization is offered in the form of the Upaniṣads, which are part of different Vedas, as the Bhagavad-gītā is a part of the fifth Veda, namely the Mahābhārata. The Upaniṣads mark the beginning of transcendental life. As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions in the material modes. One has to learn tolerance in the face of dualities such as happiness and distress, or cold and warmth, and by tolerating such dualities become free from anxieties regarding gain and loss. This transcendental position is achieved in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness when one is fully dependent on the good will of Kṛṣṇa.