Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
pravṛttiṃ ca nivṛttiṃ ca kāryākārye bhayābhaye .
bandhaṃ mokṣaṃ ca yā vetti buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī

Word Meanings:
प्रवृत्तिम् - action
च - and
निवृत्तिम् - the path of renunciation
च - and
कार्याकार्ये - what ought to be
भयाभये - fear and fearlessness
बन्धम् - bondage
मोक्षम् - liberation
च - and
या - which
वेत्ति - knows
बुद्धिः - intellect
सा - that
पार्थ - O Arjuna
सात्त्विकी - Sattvic.

Life Application:
Intellect which knows action and renunciation, duty and non-duty, fear and fearlessness, bondage and liberation—is Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Partha, that intellect which knows the path of action and renunciation, what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, fear and fearlessness, bondage and liberation, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The intellect which knows the path of work and renunciation, what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, fear and fearlessness, bondage and liberation  that intellect is Sattvic (pure), O Arjuna.

प्रवृत्तिम् action? the path of work? च and? निवृत्तिम् the path of renunciation? च and? कार्याकार्ये what ought to be done and what ought not to be done? भयाभये fear and fearlessness? बन्धम् bondage? मोक्षम् liberation? च and? या which? वेत्ति knows? बुद्धिः intellect? सा that? पार्थ O Arjuna? सात्त्विकी Sattvic.Commentary The threefold nature of knowledge has been described already (verse 22 above). Now the threefold nature of the intellect is described. Knowledge is different from the intellect.Pravritti Action The cause of bondage the path of action. Nivritti Inaction The cause of liberation the path of renunciation the path of Sannyasa.Karyakarye The pure intellect knows what ought to be done and what ought not to be done at,particular places and times it knows the actions that produce visible or invisible results? that are enjoined or prohibited by the scriptures. It guides a man who relies on the scriptural ordinances for his daily conduct of life.Bhayabhaye Fear and fearlessness The cause of fear and fearlessness either visible or invisible.Bandham moksham Bondage and liberation together with their causes.Knowledge is a Vritti (function or state) of the intellect whereas intellect is what functions or undergoes the change of state. Even firmness is only a particular Vritti (modification or state) of the intellect. (Cf.XVIII.20)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
That intellect which understands the creation and dissolution of life, what actions should be done and what not, which discriminates between fear and fearlessness, bondage and deliverance, that is Pure.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The highest intellect possesses the capacity for discrimination (viveka), without which accurate observation or judgment is impossible. It distinguishes between: 1) Pravritti and Nivritti: the path of active work in the world and the path of renunciation, allowing seekers to choose according to their nature. 2) Karya and Akarya: duty and non-duty, helping to identify what is appropriate and what is prohibited. 3) Bhaya and Abhaya: the sources of fear and fearlessness, recognizing that immoral acts cause fear while spiritual contemplation grants fearlessness. 4) Bandha and Moksha: bondage (caused by desire and ignorance) and liberation (attained through self-knowledge). Such an understanding can transform failed situations into success and tragic events into spiritual prosperity.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The intellect which knows the activity and the cessation from the activity, the proper and improper actions, the fear and non-fear, and the bondage and emancipation-that intellect is considered to be of the Sattva (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That Buddhi, O Arjuna, which knows activity and renunciation, what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, fear and fearlessness, bondage and release - that (Buddhi) is Sattvika.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Partha, that intellect is born of sattva which understands action and withdrawal, duty and what is not duty, the sources of fear and fearlessness, and bondage and freedom.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The Lord defines the Sattvic intellect. Knowledge is the function (vritti) of the intellect, while the intellect is the possessor of functions. Fortitude (dhrti) is also a specific modification of the intellect. The Sattvic intellect is that which correctly knows pravritti (actions leading to bondage) and nivritti (renunciation leading to liberation) together with their causes.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O son of Pritha, that intellect is Sattvic which knows the paths of action and renunciation, duty and non-duty, fear and fearlessness, and bondage and liberation.

Commentary: Sattvic pravritti and nivritti are performed without selfish desires for the welfare of others and for self-realization. Karya (duty) is scriptural and beneficial, while Akarya (non-duty) causes bondage. Bhaya (fear) arises when one deviates from righteousness, while Abhaya (fearlessness) is established by devotion to the Divine. Bandha (bondage) is caused by attachment and desires for worldly objects, whereas Moksha (liberation) is freedom from all desires. The Sattvic intellect grasps these truths and aligns the seeker with the Divine.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Activity' is that Dharma which is the means for wordly prosperity. 'Renunciation' is that Dharma which is the means for release. The Buddhi which knows both these as they are, is Sattviki-buddhi. Further, such a Buddhi is capable of distinguishing between what ought to be done and what ought not to be done by persons of different stations in life, having as their duty activity or renunciation at particular places or times. Such a Buddhi helps them to know 'This ought to be done and this ought not to be done.' Such a Buddhi discerns transgression of the Sastras as the cause of fear and observance of the Sastras as the cause of fearlessness. It enables one to distinguish between bondage and release, the true nature of Samsara and deliverance from it. The Buddhi that functions in these ways is Sattvika.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.30–18.32 jointly): Explains the threefold intellect. The intellect that knows action and renunciation, duty and non-duty, fear and fearlessness, bondage and release, is Sattvika. The intellect that misjudges dharma and adharma is Rajasa. The intellect enveloped in darkness that regards adharma as dharma is Tamasa.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
O Partha, sa, that; buddhih, intellect; is sattviki, born of sattva; ya, which; vetti, understands; pravrttim, action, the path of rites and duties, which is the cause of bondage; and nivrttim, withdrawal, the path of renunciation, which is the cause of Liberation-since action and withdrawal are mentioned in the same sentence along with bondage and freedom, therefore they mean 'the path of rites and duties and of renunciation'-; karya-akarye, duty and what is not duty, i.e. what is enjoined or prohibited, [Ast. adds laukike vaidike va (ordinary or Vedic injunctions and prohibitions) after vihita-pratisiddhe; and it adds sastrabuddheh before kartavya-akartavye-what ougth to be done or ought not to be done by one who relies on the scriptures.-Tr.] what ought to be done or ought not to be done, action and inaction. With regard to what? With regard to action leading to seen or unseen, results, undertaken according to place, time, etc. Bhaya-adhaye, the sources of fear and fearlessness, i.e. the cuases of fear and fearlessness, with regard to seen or unseen objects; bandham, bondage, along with its cause; and moksam, freedom, along with its cause.
In this context, knowing is a function of the intellect; but the intellect is the possesser of the function. Fortitude also is only a particular function of the intellect.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Pravritti is Dharma for prosperity, and Nivritti is Dharma for liberation. The intellect which knows both as they are is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The intellect is Sattvic which knows: pravritti (the path of action leading to bondage), nivritti (the path of Sannyasa leading to liberation), karya (performance of action in pravritti), akarya (non-performance in nivritti), bhaya (misery of rebirth in pravritti), abhaya (cessation of rebirth in nivritti), bandha (sense of doership born of ignorance), and moksha (cessation of ignorance through self-knowledge).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The intellect which knows pravritti (righteousness), nivritti (unrighteousness), karya and akarya according to place and time, bhaya and abhaya (welfare and harm), and bondage and liberation, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The intellect which knows: pravritti (path of rites causing bondage), nivritti (path of Sannyasa causing liberation), karya and akarya (Vedic duties/prohibitions relative to time/place), bhaya and abhaya (unseen causes of fear/fearlessness), and bondage and liberation, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Pravritti is Dharma for prosperity, and Nivritti is Dharma for release. The intellect which knows them as they are, understands duties relative to place, time, and class, discerns fear (violation of scripture) and fearlessness (conformity to scripture), and recognizes bondage and release, is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The intellect which knows: pravritti (righteousness aimed at serving the Lord), nivritti (avoidance of unrighteousness), karya (contemplation of Divine in a favorable place), akarya (non-divine acts in unfavorable places), bhaya (death through forgetting the Lord), abhaya (remembrance of the Lord), bandha (non-devotion), and moksha (loving service), is Sattvic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The intellect which knows pravritti and nivritti as Vedic duties and prohibitions, karya as temporal fruits (like heaven), akarya as the eternal self, fear and fearlessness as their consequences, and bondage and liberation, is Sattvic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O son of Pṛthā, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, is in the mode of goodness.

 Performing actions in terms of the directions of the scriptures is called pravṛtti, or executing actions that deserve to be performed. And actions which are not so directed are not to be performed. One who does not know the scriptural directions becomes entangled in the actions and reactions of work. Understanding which discriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of goodness.