Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
aśāstravihitaṃ ghoraṃ tapyante ye tapo janāḥ .
dambhāhaṃkārasaṃyuktāḥ kāmarāgabalānvitāḥ

Word Meanings:
अशास्त्रविहितम् - not enjoined by the scriptures
घोरम् - terrific
तप्यन्ते - practise
ये - who
तपः - austerity
जनाः - men
दम्भाहङ्कारसंयुक्ताः - given to hypocrisy and
कामरागबलान्विताः - impelled by force of desire and attachment

Life Application:
Those who practice severe non-scriptural austerities out of hypocrisy, egotism, desire, and attachment...

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Those men who practice severe austerities not ordained by the scriptures, given to hypocrisy and egotism, impelled by the force of lust, attachment, and pride of power...

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Those men who practise terrific austerities not enjoined by the scriptures, given to hypocrisy and egoism, impelled by the force of lust and attachment.

अशास्त्रविहितम् not enjoined by the scriptures? घोरम् terrific? तप्यन्ते practise? ये who? तपः austerity? जनाः men? दम्भाहङ्कारसंयुक्ताः given to hypocrisy and egoism? कामरागबलान्विताः by the force of lust and attachment.Commentary There are some who think that the mortification of the body is the proper means to attain the goal of life. They do this in order to attract the people and get money for the gratification of their senses. They stand on one leg with raised hands. This is not real Tapas. This is Tamasic Tapas. Bodily torture will not bring emancipation. These men are not acainted with even the first elements of the scriptures. They mock at the religious practices of the wise? elderly persons and jeer at learned men. They are puffed up with the vanity of their own greatness. They are proud of their wealth. They perform unauthorised austerities. These persons do severe austerities contrary to the scriptures on the strength of desire and attachment.They take even the lives of children to propitiate their deity. Instead of killing their egoism? they kill many innocent animals in the name of sacrifice but in reality they kill them to satisfy their own palate. Most horrible indeed They speak ill of the scriptures and wander about in the forest of delusion and infatuation. They follow the dictates of passion. They inflict pain on themselves and on others. They practise austerities which cause pain to themselves and to other living beings. Pitiable indeed is their lot. They are doomed to destruction.Kamaragabalanvitah may also be interpreted as possessed of lust? attachment and power.Dambha Ostentation The man of Dambha is desirous that all people should take him for a virtuous man and so he expresses to others his righteous nature. In reality he is not virtuous. He pretends to be what he is not.Ahankara Egoism The egoistic man thinks and feels that he is superior to others in the possession of all virtuous alities.Raga Extreme attachment to sensual objects.Bala Great power of enduring severe pain on account of Raga for sensual objects (pain that accrues from exertion in attaining and preserving the objects).Kama Lust Desire for any object.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Those who practise austerities not commanded by scripture, who are slaves to hypocrisy and egotism, who are carried away by the fury of desire and passion,

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The Lord describes the self-styled, non-scriptural austerities performed by people of demonic nature. Driven by vanity, egotism, desire, and attachment, they undertake severe physical torture (like standing on one leg or fasting excessively). Such practices are motivated by ostentation (Dambha)—the desire to be respected as spiritual—and are fueled by raw attachment (Raga) and stubborn pride (Bala). In doing so, they senselessly weaken the physical elements in their bodies and distress the Lord, who dwells within them as the inner witness. The Lord commands Arjuna to recognize them as possessing demonic resolves (Asura-nischayan).

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Those men, who practise terrible austerities, not as enjoined in the scriptures; who are bound to hypocricy and conceit, and are endowed with (i.e. impelled by) the force of passion for the desired objects;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Those men who practise terrible austerity not enjoined by the Sastras, given to ostentation and conceit, and prompted by the force of sensual desires and passion;

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Those persons who, given to ostentation and pride, and possessed of passion, attachment and strength, undertake severe austerities not sanctioned in the scriptures;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that while some Rajasic and Tamasic people can turn to Sattvic paths due to past merits, those who stubbornly remain in their lower nature act contrary to the scriptures. The force of desire (Kama) and attachment (Raga) drives them to endure great self-inflicted pain to satisfy their ego.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Those men who perform severe austerities not ordained by the scriptures, given to hypocrisy and egotism, impelled by the force of lust, attachment, and stubbornness; senselessly torturing the elements in their physical bodies, and Me also who dwell within the body—know them to be of demonic resolves.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that those of demonic nature perform terrible self-willed austerities that violate scriptural injunctions. They are full of hypocrisy (pretending to be spiritual) and egotism (pride in their own knowledge and strength). Driven by attachment to worldly objects and stubborn determination, they torture the elements of the physical body. Moreover, by disobeying divine laws and acting out of delusion, they torment the Lord dwelling within as the inner witness. Ramsukhdas contrasts this with scriptural tapasyas (of body, speech, and mind) which are performed peacefully without self-torture.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Those men who perform terrible pernances not enjoined by the Sastras' - this is illustrative of sacrifices etc., of a similar nature. Those who perform sacrifices, etc., sacrifices which are not enjoined by the Sastras and demand much exertion, those who are possessed of 'ostentation and conceit and are goaded by sensual desire, attachment and passion' - they torture the group of elements such as earth etc., in their bodies. They also torture the individual self which is a part of Myself and is within their bodies. Those who perform such sacrifices etc., know them to be demoniacal in their resolves. The resolve of demons is demoniac resolve. The demons are those who act contrary to My ?ndments. Since they act contrary to My ?ndments, they do not have even a iota of joy, but as stated earlier, they fall a prey to a multitude of calamities. 'They fall into a foul Naraka' (16.16).

Now, Sri Krsna, resuming the subject, details the differences according to the Gunas with reference to sacrifice, etc., enjoined by the Sastras. To begin with, he describes three kinds of food, since the growth of Sattva etc., has its source in food, as Srutis declare thus:  'For my dear, the mind consists of food' (Cha. U., 6.5.4) and 'when the food is pure, the man becomes pure' (Cha. U., 7.26.2).

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta explains that these verses describe the demonic determination. Those who perform self-willed penances not ordained by the scriptures are senseless (because they lack discrimination) and torment both the body and the indwelling Lord. Hence, they are Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Ye, those; janah, persons; who tapyante, undertake, perform; ghoram, severe; tapah, austerity, productive of pain to oneself as also to creatures; asastra-vihitam, not sanctioned by the scriptures; they, being dambh-ahankara-samyuktah, given to ostentation and pride; and kama-raga-bala-anvitah, impelled by the strength of passion and attachment, or possessed of passion, attachment and strength [Kama-raga can also mean desirable objects and the desire to enjoy them.]-.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that those who discard scriptural injunctions and perform severe austerities driven solely by their own desires are of demonic resolve. Such self-willed practices cause useless torment to the physical elements and the Lord residing within.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that those who reject the scriptures and practice non-scriptural, painful austerities driven by hypocrisy and pride are of demonic resolve. Endured by the force of desire and attachment, they torture the elements of the physical body. By violating the Lord's commandments, they also torment the Lord who resides as the inner witness of their intellect. Although they appear human, their actions are demonic.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that those who are extremely unfortunate and follow heretical paths practice non-scriptural, terrifying austerities. Prompted by hypocrisy, egotism, lust, attachment, and stubborn pride, they torture the elements of their body and the Lord residing within. Know them to be of demonic determination, as they act contrary to scriptural wisdom.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that practicing non-scriptural and painful austerities out of hypocrisy, egotism, and lust is a characteristic of those with demonic determination. They dry up the physical elements and disobey the Supreme Lord dwelling within.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the Lord describes the characteristics of non-scriptural austerities to contrast them with scriptural ones. Those who perform severe penances out of hypocrisy and pride, driven by desire and attachment, torture the elemental body and the individual soul (which belongs to the Lord). Such acts are demoniacal (Asura) because they oppose the Lord's commandments (Sastra).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that some people perform non-scriptural austerities driven by hypocrisy (to deceive others and show their superiority) and egotism. Endowed with desire, attachment, and stubborn pride, they undergo physical suffering like fasting.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that this verse refers to non-scriptural, painful practices like offering one's own flesh or blood to deities, which are performed out of hypocrisy and pride, driven by lust and stubbornness. Such people are of demonic resolve.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in the scriptures, performing them out of pride, egoism, lust, and attachment, are impelled by passion and are arrogant, and strive for other worldly things.

 There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penance which are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting for some ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end, is not mentioned in the scriptural directions. The scriptures recommend fasting for spiritual advancement, not for some political end or social purpose. Persons who take to such austerities are, according to Bhagavad-gītā , certainly demoniac. Their acts are against the scriptural injunctions and are not beneficial for the people in general. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust and attachment for material enjoyment. By such activities, not only is the combination of material elements of which the body is constructed disturbed, but also the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself living within the body. Such unauthorized fasting or austerities for some political end are certainly very disturbing to others. They are not mentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person may think that he can force his enemy or other parties to comply with his desire by this method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are not approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that those who engage in them are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to the Supreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience to the Vedic scriptural injunctions. The word acetasaḥ is significant in this connection. Persons of normal mental condition must obey the scriptural injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglect and disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own way of austerities and penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of the demoniac people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forces them to take birth in the wombs of demoniac persons. Consequently they will live by demoniac principles life after life without knowing their relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, such persons are fortunate enough to be guided by a spiritual master who can direct them to the path of Vedic wisdom, they can get out of this entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.