Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sanniyamyendriyagrāmaṃ sarvatra samabuddhayaḥ .
te prāpnuvanti māmeva sarvabhūtahite ratāḥ

Word Meanings:
संनियम्य - having restrained
इन्द्रियग्रामम् - aggregate of the senses
सर्वत्र - everywhere
समबुद्धयः - evenminded
ते - they
प्राप्नुवन्ति - attain
माम् - Me
एव - only
सर्वभूतहिते - in the welfare of all beings
रताः - rejoicers.

Life Application:
Restrain your senses, maintain equal vision everywhere, and rejoice in the welfare of all beings to reach God.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Restraining the aggregate of senses properly, even-minded everywhere, and intent on the welfare of all beings, those devotees indeed attain Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Having restrained all the senses, even-minded everywhere, intent on the welfare of all beings  verily they also come unto Me.

संनियम्य having restrained? इन्द्रियग्रामम् the aggregate of the senses? सर्वत्र everywhere? समबुद्धयः evenminded? ते they? प्राप्नुवन्ति obtian? माम् Me? एव only? सर्वभूतहिते in the welfare of all beings? रताः rejoicers.Commentary Those who are free from likes and dislikes (attraction and repulsion) can possess,eanimity of mind. Those who have destroyed ignorance which is the cause for exhilaration and grief? through the knowledge of the Self? those who are free from all kinds of sensual cravings through the constant practice of finding the defects or the evil in sensual pleasures can have evenness of mind. Those who are neither elated nor troubled when they get desirable or undesirable objects can possess evenness of mind.The two currents of love and hatred (likes and dislikes) make a man think of harming others. When these two are destroyed through meditation on the Self? the Yogi is intent on the welfare of others. He rejoices in doing service to the people. He plunges himself in service. He works constantly for the solidarity or wellbeing of this world. He gives fearlessness (Abhayadana) to all creatures. No creature is afraid of him. He becomes a Paramahamsa Sannyasi who gives shelter to all in his heart. He attains Selfrealisation. He becoes a knower of Brahman. The knower of Brahman becomes Brahman.By means of the control of the senses the Yogi closes the ten doors (the senses) and withdraws the senses from the sensual objects and fixes the mind on the innermost Self. Those who meditate on the imperishable transcendental Brahman? restraining and subduing the senses? regarding everything eally? rejoicing in the welfare of all beings -- these also come to Me. It needs no saying that they reach Myself? because I hold the wise as verily Myself (Cf.VII.18). Further it is not necessary to say that they are the best Yogins as they are one with Brahman Himself. (Cf.V.25XI.55)But --

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Subduing their senses, viewing all conditions of life with the same eye, and working for the welfare of all beings, assuredly they come to Me.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
After describing the qualities necessary for the devotees of the Saguna form in the previous verses, Lord Krishna now describes the worshippers of the Nirguna form in the above two verses.
Aksara (Imperishable) – All objects endowed with form and qualities are substances (matter), and all substances are 'ksara' i.e., perishable. Through the senses, only these substances can be known. Therefore, by the word 'Aksara', it is indicated that the knowledge of the Supreme Truth is never possible through the senses.
Anirdesyam (Indefinable) – That which cannot be defined is called indefinable. All definitions can be given only in reference to visible objects. Therefore, that which is not visible to the senses can neither be defined nor can it be known by distinguishing it from other objects.
Sarvatragam (All-pervading) – The infinite Truth, which is unmanifest due to being attribute-less, and is for this reason indefinable, must necessarily be all-pervading. If there were any place devoid of the Lord, then the Lord would acquire a specific shape (limit). And a shaped (finite) object will also be perishable.
Acintyam (Unthinkable) – Any object that can be thought of by the mind will be perishable, being a visible/objectified thing. Therefore, the imperishable Truth will certainly be unimaginable, incomprehensible, and unthinkable.
Kutastham (Unchanging / Immutable) – Although the Self, which is of the nature of Consciousness, is the substratum upon which all modifications and changes take place, yet It itself remains unchanging and immutable. The word 'Kuta' means an anvil. In a blacksmith's shop, other iron pieces are placed on the anvil and struck to give them various shapes, but the anvil itself remains unchanged. Similarly, through contact with Consciousness, modifications occur in the limiting adjuncts (upadhis) and personality, but the Consciousness element remains immutable like the anvil.
Acalam (Immovable) – Movement means a change in the limits of space and time for an object. An object cannot move within itself; its movement is possible only where it does not already exist. Here, at this moment, I am sitting on a chair. I can go to occupy another place in the next moment. But, sitting on my chair right here and at this very moment, I cannot move within myself, because I fully occupy my own self. The Lord is all-pervading, and therefore, there is no place or moment in space or time where He is not present. Hence, He is called immovable. He is here, there, and everywhere; in Him alone exists the past, present, and future.
Dhruvam (Eternal / Constant) – A perishable object is limited by space and time. But the Lord, who is the substratum of both space and time, cannot be limited by them. The infinite Consciousness, the Self, is one and the same everywhere and at all times. In childhood, youth, and old age, everywhere, at all times, and in all situations of pleasure-pain, gain-loss, the Self remains identical. Only when we descend to the level of our body, mind, and intellect do we enter the world of relativity of space and time described by Einstein. The Lord is not limited by time; He is the ruler of time. He is constant/eternal.
It is worth noting here that the words used in these two verses are taken from the Upanishads. Through these words, that Lord is indicated who is the sole eternal substratum of this constantly changing world of names and forms, actions and events, sense-perceptions and emotions, thoughts and experiences. The following three qualities are essential for all seekers:
Indriyasamyama (Control of Senses) – Wasting one's energies through the senses is the way of thoughtless and low-minded people. A seeker whose ambition is to reach the peak of perfection and experience Supreme Bliss should reduce this waste, and utilize the energies thus conserved for achieving Self-realization in meditation. The five sense organs are the gateways through which the objects of the external world, which agitate the mind, stealthily enter the mind and destroy our inner peace. And then our mind runs to express its reactions in the outer world through the organs of action. Thus, this behavior in the form of perception and reaction breaks the harmony and balance of the mind. Therefore, Krishna's emphasis on sense-control here is very appropriate, because the success of the path of meditation depends on this.
Sarvatra Samabuddhi (Even-mindedness Everywhere) – This is the second quality necessary for success. There must be equanimity of intellect in all kinds of circumstances and experiences. It is a sign of foolishness to hope and wait for a state free of external agitation. The existence of such an ideal condition is impossible. The objects of the world, both in themselves and as specific combinations, are constantly changing. Therefore, to expect any desired situation in such a constantly changing world to remain uniform for the benefit of the seeker's meditation practice is indeed irrational. It is completely impossible. Therefore, in such a changing world, the seeker himself must maintain the equanimity of intellect and balance of mind by wisely regulating his intellectual evaluations, mental attachments, and contacts with the external world. A person who does not lose his balance even when objects or circumstances that create modification or agitation in the mind are before his eyes, is called even-minded. One who has developed his power of discrimination can very easily see and recognize that golden thread of beauty which holds all those objects of this world which are beautiful and attractive, as well as ugly and repulsive. A seeker endowed with this ability is called even-minded here.
A person's infant son may be dirty at one time, extremely restless at another, crying in the morning, laughing in the afternoon, troubling in the evening, and wild at night; yet, in all these states, his father sees only one son, and therefore loves him equally in all his different forms. This is the even-mindedness of that loving father. Similarly, a true seeker learns to recognize his beloved Lord in the terrible tragedies and delightful comedies of his life, and in unprecedented successes and disappointing failures. Therefore, he attains intellectual equanimity.
Intent on the Welfare of All Beings – Pointing out the third quality necessary for success, the Lord says that the seeker, with a spirit of dedication, should always be engaged in the service of all beings according to his ability. As long as a person lives in this body, it is completely impossible for him to constantly fix his mind and intellect on Self-contemplation at all times. He has to interact normally with the world. In such transactions, he should continuously and tirelessly strive to serve all living beings. This is indeed the nature of this knowledge. To love all beings is his very duty.
Thus, equipped with the aforementioned three qualities, those seekers who worship the Imperishable and Unmanifest also attain Me—this is the declaration of Lord Krishna.
The question asked by Arjuna is indeed controversial, whereas the answer given by the Lord is a declaration of an uncontroversial truth. Here, the great philosopher Lord Krishna explains how both types of worshippers reach the same goal. What common qualities are necessary for success in both. By faithfully and fully following the methods of practice described here, the attainment of the same Lord will be achieved through the worship of either the Saguna-Sakar (personal) or Nirguna-Nirakar (impersonal) aspect.
But, generally, regarding the majority of seekers, He says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Who, by restraining properly the group of sense-organs have eanimity at all stages, and find pleasure in the welfare of all beings - they attain nothing but Me.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Having subdued all the senses, being even-minded, engaged in the welfare of all beings - they too come to Me only.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
By fully controlling all the organs and always being even-minded, they, engaged in the welfare of all beings, attain Me alone.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Let Your worshippers indeed be the best; but what is the fruit for others (i.e. the worshippers of the Imperishable)?' - in response to this, the Lord says: 'ye tu' (but those who) etc.
The indefinability (anirdesyatvam) of Maya is also declared in the Bhagavata: 'By some it is determined as unthinkable and indefinable.'
On the other hand, the Lord (Isvara) is referred to by the word 'deva' in 'daivamanye pare' (4.25).
And it is declared in the Kashayana-Sruti of the Sama Veda: 'Then there was neither non-existence nor existence' (Rig Veda Samhita 8.7.18.1), starting with 'there was neither the great element nor the secondary element' and ending with 'darkness was covered by darkness in the beginning' (Rig Veda Samhita 8.7.17.3). 'Darkness indeed is unmanifest, ageless, and indefinable, and this is indeed Prakriti.'
For she (Prakriti/Maya) is characterized by being all-pervading, unthinkable, etc.
Thus in the Moksha-Dharma: 'Sustained by the qualities of Narayana, ageless, deathless, beyond the senses, incomprehensible, unborn; non-existent, non-violent, supreme, having unique activity dependent on Him, without enmity, imperishable, immortal, formless, of the all-pervading, the source of all, the creator of all, of the eternal darkness (Prakriti)' (Mahabharata 12.342.6).
Also in the Manu Samhita (1.5): 'This universe existed in the form of darkness, unperceived, destitute of distinctive marks, unattainable by reasoning, unknowable, wholly as if immersed in deep sleep.'
The Lord will declare later: 'The immutable is called Kutastha' (15.16).
'Kutastha' means situated in 'Kuta', which refers to space (Akasha).
'Because she is situated in Akasha, she is considered Kutastha' - so it is stated in the Rig Veda Khilas.
'She is all-pervading, motionless, the source of the world, she is imperishable, universal, and free from Rajas' - thus in the Gaupavana branch of the Sama Veda.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
'How is the Imperishable worshipped, or what happens upon that worship?' – in response to this, the Lord says: 'sanniyamya' (subduing) etc.
[Even-minded means] equapoised, free from joy, grief, attachment, aversion, etc., because ignorance has been removed by right knowledge.
Intending to state the impossibility of any gradual delay in their liberation, he says: 'te ye' (those who) etc.
'Engaged in the welfare of all beings' – meaning they think only of the welfare of all beings and act accordingly.
Since the attainment of the Lord is a self-evident fact for the wise according to their knowledge, it is merely a restatement (anuvada); hence [Sankaracharya] says 'na tu' (not indeed) etc.
He adduces proof for the fact that the attainment of the Lord is already established for the wise: 'jnani tu...' (But the wise man is indeed My own Self).
Anticipating the objection: 'If the wise attain the Lord, they indeed should be declared as the best of Yogis; why then did You declare the worshippers of Saguna Brahman as the best of Yogis?' – he says 'na hi' (certainly not) etc.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Those who, subduing their senses, worship the unthinkable, all-pervading, indefinable, immutable (Kutastha), immovable, constant, imperishable and unmanifest, they, intent on the welfare of all beings and even-minded everywhere, attain Me alone.

Commentary:
'Tu' — Here the word 'tu' (but) is used to show the distinction between the worshippers of the personal form (Sakar) and the worshippers of the impersonal form (Nirakar).
'Sanniyamyendriyagramam' — By using the prefix 'sam' and 'ni' with the word 'sanniyamya', the Lord indicates that one must restrain all the senses properly and completely, so that they do not go towards any other object. If the senses are not well and fully subdued, there is difficulty in the worship of the Nirguna (attributeless) Truth. In the worship of Saguna (with attributes), the object of meditation being the personal Lord, the senses can be engaged in the Lord; because the senses find their objects in the personal form of the Lord. Therefore, although control of senses is necessary in Saguna worship, it is not as extremely necessary as it is in Nirguna worship. In Nirguna worship, since there is no support for contemplation, without proper control of the senses (if attachment remains), the mind can go to sense objects, and due to contemplation of sense objects, there is a greater possibility of fall (Gita 2.62-63). Therefore, it is necessary for the Nirguna worshipper to completely restrain all the senses from their objects and subdue them. The senses are not to be controlled only externally, but the seeker should also have no attachment (raga) in his heart for the objects; because as long as there is attachment to objects, the attainment of Brahman is difficult (Gita 15.11).
In the Gita, the control of senses is mentioned with special emphasis in Nirguna worship and Karma Yoga, not so much in Saguna worship.
'Acintyam' — Being beyond the reach of the mind and intellect, the word 'acintyam' represents the attributeless, formless Brahman; because the mind and intellect, being products of Prakriti, cannot objectify even the whole of Prakriti, then how can the Supreme Lord who is beyond Prakriti become their object!
Every material object is thinkable, and the Supreme Lord, being beyond Prakriti, is beyond all objects and is unique. Without the help of Prakriti, He cannot be thought of or described. Therefore, the Supreme Lord can be known only by the Self (through instrument-independent knowledge) and not by the products of Prakriti like mind and intellect (instrument-dependent knowledge).
'Sarvatragam' — Being all-pervading in all space, time, objects and persons, Brahman is 'sarvatragam'. Being all-pervading, He cannot be grasped by the limited mind, intellect, and senses.
'Anirdesyam' — That which cannot be pointed out as 'this' or that which is not the object of language, speech, etc., is 'anirdesyam'. A pointer (indication) can be made only of that which is endowed with genus, quality, action and relation, and is limited by space, time, object and person. But how can that Consciousness, which is all-pervading, be indicated by inert language and speech?
'Kutastham' — This word denotes the changeless, always identical Sat-chit-ananda Brahman. Even while remaining in all space, time, objects and persons, that Truth always remains changeless and untouched. Not even the slightest change ever occurs in It. Therefore, It is called 'Kutastha'. On an anvil (kuta), various ornaments, weapons, and tools are shaped, but the anvil itself remains as it is. Similarly, despite the origin, existence and destruction of different beings and objects in the world, the Supreme Lord always remains as He is.
'Acalam' — This word denotes Brahman which is completely free from the action of coming and going. Prakriti is moving and Brahman is immovable.
'Dhruvam' — That whose existence is certain (true) and eternal is called 'dhruva'. The Sat-chit-ananda Brahman, being present everywhere as existence itself, is 'dhruvam'.
Among all the eight adjectives of Nirguna Brahman, the most important adjective is 'dhruvam'. Lest someone should think from negative adjectives like indefinable, unthinkable, etc. that It does not exist at all, here the adjective 'dhruvam' is given to state the certain existence of that Truth. There is never the slightest absence of that Truth anywhere. By Its existence alone, the unreal (world) gets its existence — 'By His truthfulness, inert Maya appears real due to the aid of delusion' (Ramacharitamanasa 1.117.4).
'Aksaram' — That which never perishes (no decay) and in which there is never any reduction is the Sat-chit-ananda Brahman, 'aksaram'.
'Avyaktam' — That which is not manifest, i.e., not the object of mind, intellect and senses, and which has no form or shape, is called 'avyaktam'.
'Paryupasate' — This word here indicates the proper worship by Nirguna worshippers. The absence of desire and egoism in all objects and actions along with the body, and remaining constantly and firmly established in oneness with the Sat-chit-ananda Lord is called worship.
The specific object of worship pointed out in these verses by eight adjectives, and the specific thing understood by it, is the form of Brahman qualified by intellect, which is not complete; because the form of Nirguna-Nirvisesa Brahman (which is beyond intellect, devoid of attributes and characteristics) cannot be the object of intellect, etc., in any complete manner. Yes, the worship performed keeping these adjectives as the target is indeed the worship of Nirguna Brahman, and in its result, the attainment is also of Nirguna Brahman.

Special Point:
To explain the Lord in truth, two kinds of adjectives are given — negative (nisethatmaka) and positive (vidhyatmaka). The adjectives of the Lord like imperishable, indefinable, unmanifest, unthinkable, immovable, undecaying, limitless, endless, immortal, etc., are 'negative', and adjectives like all-pervading, immutable (Kutastha), constant (dhruva), existence (Sat), consciousness (Cit), bliss (Ananda), etc. are positive. The purpose of the negative adjectives of the Lord is to show the 'non-attachment' (asangata) of the Lord from Prakriti, and the purpose of positive adjectives is to show the independent 'existence' (satta) of the Lord.
The Divine Truth is beyond both worldly activity and retirement (naturally retired) and is the equal illuminator of both. To point out such absolute Divine Truth and to bring the intellect close to the Lord, the description of the Lord is made through different adjectives.
In the Gita, the description of the nature of the Supreme Lord and the individual soul is found to be almost identical. The adjectives given here for the Lord are also given in the Gita for the individual soul; for example, in the 24th and 25th verses of the second chapter, 'sarvagatah, acalah, avyaktah, acintyah' etc. and in the 16th verse of the fifteenth chapter, 'kutasthah' and 'aksarah' adjectives have appeared for the individual soul. Similarly, in the 25th verse of the seventh chapter, 'avyayam' is used for the Lord, and in the 5th verse of the fourteenth chapter, 'avyayam' is used for the individual soul.
Even in terms of all-pervasiveness in the world, the Lord and the soul are shown to be identical; for example, in the 22nd verse of the eighth chapter and 46th verse of the eighteenth chapter, by the words 'yena sarvamidam tatam', and in the 4th verse of the ninth chapter, by the words 'maya tatamidam sarvam', the Lord is described as pervading the entire world. Similarly, in the 17th verse of the second chapter, by the words 'yena sarvamidam tatam', the soul is also described as pervading the entire world.
Just as the sights of eyes do not collide with each other, or sound, though all-pervading, does not collide with each other. Similarly (according to the dualistic view), despite being equally pervading the entire world, due to being partless, the all-pervasiveness of the Lord and the soul do not collide with each other.
'Sarvabhutahite ratah' — In the practice of Karma Yoga, the renunciation of attachment, mine-ness, desire, and selfishness is primary. When a person, instead of considering the body, wealth, property, etc. as his own and for himself, employs them in the service of others, his attachment, mine-ness, desire, and selfishness are automatically renounced. One whose goal is only to serve all living beings will definitely employ his body and materials in the service of the needy, the suffering, and the destitute. By employing the body in the service of others, egoism (ahanta) is destroyed, and by employing materials in the service of others, mine-ness (mamata) is destroyed. The seeker already has this goal that the materials being used in service belong only to the one being served. Therefore, in the practice of Karma Yoga, it is extremely necessary to be engaged in the welfare of all beings. Hence, it is more logical to use the phrase 'sarvabhutahite ratah' in relation to the practitioner of Karma Yoga. But the Lord has used this phrase here and in the 25th verse of the fifth chapter — in both places for the Jnana Yogis. From this, it is proved that the need to adopt the system of Karma Yoga for complete detachment from actions exists in Jnana Yoga also.
One thing is worthy of special attention. The service rendered by the body, materials, and actions is limited; because all materials and actions combined are also limited. But the attitude of welfare towards all living beings in service being infinite, the service also becomes infinite. Therefore, even while materials remain with oneself (without having attachment, mine-ness, etc. in them), considering them as belonging to all living beings, one has to employ them in their service; because those materials belong to the cosmic whole (samasti). On having such an infinite attitude, due to complete detachment from matter, the seeker attains the infinite Truth (the Lord). The reason is that by considering materials as personal (one's own), limitation (one-sidedness) and inequality remain in a man, and by not considering materials as personal and keeping the attitude of welfare of all beings, limitation and inequality are destroyed. On the contrary, a common man having a limited attitude of serving only the creatures towards whom he has mine-ness, even if he employs his all in their service, due to attachment, mine-ness, etc. remaining in the materials and in those whom he serves (because of limited attitude), he does not attain the infinite Lord. Therefore, for the attainment of the infinite Lord, the infinite attitude of love, i.e. attachment to the welfare of all beings, is necessary. The words 'sarvabhutahite ratah' express that very attitude.
The seeker of Jnana Yoga wants to sever his connection with matter; but as long as there is respect for perishable objects in his heart, it is difficult for him to renounce them by considering them as illusory or dreamlike. But the practitioner of Karma Yoga can renounce objects by employing them in the service of others more easily than the Jnana Yogi. The renunciation of objects can happen in a Jnana Yogi only on having intense dispassion; but a Karma Yogi can renounce objects in even a little dispassion (for the welfare of others). By utilizing materials for the welfare of beings, connection with matter is easily severed. The Lord, by giving the phrase 'sarvabhutahite ratah' here, has shown that by remaining engaged in the welfare of all beings, even while having respect for objects, connection with matter will be easily severed. For doing good to all beings, Karma Yoga is indeed an easy way.
Within the practice of Nirguna worshippers, although there are many internal differences, the main differences are two — (1) whatever is perceived in the form of inert-conscious and moving-immoving, all that is the Self or Brahman, and (2) whatever visible world is perceived, it is temporary, transient and unreal — thus, on negating the world, the Truth that remains is the Self or Brahman.
In the first practice, just by learning that everything is Brahman, the state of knowledge (jnana-nistha) is not established. As long as there are modifications like desire and anger in the heart, it is very difficult to establish the state of knowledge. Just as for the Karma Yogi, to remove attachment it is necessary to have love for the welfare of all beings, similarly for the seekers practicing Nirguna worship also, it is necessary to have love for the welfare of all beings — only then, on attachment being removed, can the state of knowledge be established. To point out this fact, the words 'sarvabhutahite ratah' have appeared here.
In the second practice, for the seekers who remain indifferent to the world and contemplate on the Truth in solitude, the external renunciation of actions is helpful; but by merely renouncing actions externally, perfection is not attained (Gita 3.4), rather for attaining perfection, dispassion from enjoyments and the renunciation of 'my-ness' in the body, senses, mind, and intellect are extremely necessary. Therefore, for dispassion and mine-lessness, it is necessary to be 'sarvabhutahite ratah'.
A seeker of Jnana Yoga generally remains detached, far from society. Therefore, ego remains in him, to remove which the attitude of welfare of the entire world is extremely necessary.
In fact, detachment should be from the body. On having detachment from society, the ego-sense becomes firm, i.e., it is not destroyed. As long as the seeker does not clearly experience himself as separate from the body, merely remaining separate from the world does not achieve his goal; because the body is also a part of the world, and the absence of identification and mine-ness in the body is indeed being separate from it in reality. For destroying identification and mine-ness, it is necessary for the seeker to engage in the welfare of all beings.
Secondly, it is also not possible for the seeker to always remain in solitude; because for the maintenance of the body, he has to come into the field of activity, and on there being a lack of dispassion, there is a possibility of harshness coming into his behavior due to pride, and on harshness coming, his ego-sense is not destroyed. Therefore, he finds difficulty in the attainment of the Truth.
Lest there be any harshness in behavior, it is also necessary that the seeker remains engaged in the welfare of all beings. Although the work of service by such a seeker of Jnana Yoga may not expand, yet the Lord says that he also (due to having love for the welfare of all beings) will attain Me.
Both types of seekers — the worshippers of Saguna and Nirguna — need to have the attitude of welfare towards all beings. By considering one's welfare separate from the welfare of all beings, 'ego' or personality remains, which becomes an obstacle for the seeker later on. In fact, welfare happens only on the destruction of the 'ego'. By the practice performed for oneself, the 'ego' remains; therefore, to completely destroy the ego, the seeker should perform every action (eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. and also chanting, meditation, reading, self-study, etc.) only for the welfare of the entire world. In the welfare of the world alone is one's welfare contained. The power of the Lord is working for the welfare of others. Therefore, he who will engage in the welfare of all, the power of the Lord will be with him.
Not only giving objects to others and serving with the body is service, rather, without wishing anything for oneself, how others can be benefited, how they can get happiness — performing actions with this attitude is service. The feeling of being called a servant should also not remain in the mind. Service can happen only when the servant considers the one whom he serves as non-different from himself (like his own body) and does not want to take anything in return from him.
Just as a man, without anyone's instruction, serves his body automatically with great care and does not boast of doing service, similarly, on there being the intellect of Self everywhere, the perfected great souls naturally have love for the welfare of all (Gita 6.32). Welfare of all beings happens through them; but there is not even the slightest feeling in their mind that they are doing welfare of someone. Egoism is completely absent in them; therefore, considering such liberated great souls as the ideal, the seeker should, by having the intellect of Self everywhere, not cause even the slightest pain to any creature of the world and naturally remain always intent on their welfare.
'Sarvatra Samabuddhayah' — The meaning of this phrase is that the vision of the worshippers of the Nirguna-Nirakar Brahman is not unequal, because their vision remains on the Lord who is present in all beings and objects; because the Lord is equal (Gita 5.19).
Here, the Lord, by using this phrase for the seekers established in knowledge, expresses a special idea that for the followers of the path of knowledge, contemplating on the Truth in solitude is not the only practice; because the utility of the phrase 'samabuddhayah' is especially in the time of interaction. Secondly, removing the body from the world and taking it to a solitary place is not complete solitude; because the body is also a part of the world. Seeing the body and the world separate is unequal intellect. Therefore, only on seeing the body and the world as one can there be even-mindedness. The attainment of real solitude happens only on there being the absence of the existence of all other objects, i.e., the body and the world, except the Divine Truth. Solitude is also useful for performing practice; but it is possible for a seeker who is completely solitary to commit errors during the time of interaction. The absence of ownership in the body is real solitude. Therefore, the seeker should, keeping real solitude in view, i.e., removing his egoism and mine-ness from the body, senses, mind, and intellect, remain established in non-difference in the all-pervading Brahman. Such seekers indeed are even-minded.
In the Gita, even-mindedness means 'equal vision' (samadarsana), not 'equal behavior' (samavartana). In the 18th verse of the fifth chapter, the Lord has counted five creatures — a learned and humble Brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and an outcaste — with whom equality in behavior is not possible in any way. There also, the word 'samadarsinah' is used. From this, it follows that behavior towards all can never be equal. No one can behave equally, nor should it be so. Difference in behavior is necessary. In behavior, even while the seeker's vision remains on the shape and utility of different beings and objects, in reality, his vision remains on the Lord who is present in those beings and objects. Just as by different types of ornaments, no difference comes in the substance (gold), similarly, by different types of behavior, no difference comes in the seeker's vision of the Truth. There is internal equality in the seeker towards all beings. Here, by the word 'samabuddhayah', the target is towards that internal equality alone.
In the vision of perfected great souls, due to there being no other existence except one Lord, they are always and everywhere 'even-minded'.
The naturally established state of perfected great souls is the ideal for seekers, and keeping that as the target, they walk. In the vision of seekers, to the extent the existence of other objects remains, to that extent equality does not remain in their intellect. Therefore, as the independent existence of other objects decreases in the seeker's intellect, his intellect will become equal.
The seeker tries to see the Lord everywhere with his intellect, while in the intellect of perfected great souls, the Lord is naturally present with such density that for them there is nothing else except the Lord. Therefore, the object of their intellect is not the Lord, rather their intellect itself is filled with the Lord. Hence, they are 'sarvatra samabuddhayah'.
'Te prapnuvanti mameve' — Lest the worshippers of Nirguna think that the Nirguna Truth is someone else and the Saguna is someone else, the Lord clarifies here that the Nirguna Brahman is not different from Me (Gita 9.4, 14.27). Saguna and Nirguna are both My own forms.
In these two verses, the Lord has told four things for the Nirguna worshippers: (1) what is the nature of the Nirguna Truth, (2) what is the state of the seeker, (3) what is the nature of worship, and (4) what does the seeker attain.
(1) For that Nirguna Truth for which Arjuna had asked a question using two adjectives 'aksaram' and 'avyaktam' in the latter half of the first verse of this chapter, to describe that Truth in detail, the Lord gave six more adjectives, making a total of eight adjectives, of which five are negative ('aksaram, anirdesyam, avyaktam, acintyam' and 'acalam') and three are positive ('sarvatragam, kutastham' and 'dhruvam').
(2) Due to the vision being on the Truth present in all space, time, objects and persons, Nirguna worshippers are even-minded everywhere. On account of identifying with the body and accepting the separate existence of enjoyments, the desire to enjoy arises and enjoyments are experienced. But in the vision of these Nirguna worshippers, since there is no separate (independent) existence of any other object except one Lord, the importance of enjoyments does not remain in their intellect. Therefore, they easily control their senses. Being even-minded everywhere, they are intent on the welfare of all beings. Therefore, they are 'sarvabhutahite ratah'.
(3) The seeker's keeping his vision towards that Nirguna Truth at all times (remaining before the Truth) is 'worship'.
(4) The Lord says that the Nirguna Brahman which such seekers attain is Me indeed. The meaning is that Saguna and Nirguna are one and the same Truth.

Connection — In response to Arjuna's question, the Lord described the Saguna worshippers as the best in the second verse, and spoke of His attainment by the Nirguna worshippers in the third and fourth verses. Now, He describes the internal division, difficulty, and ease of both types of worship in the next three verses.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The individual self meditated upon by those who follow the path of the 'Aksara' (the Imperishable) is thus described:  It cannot be 'defined' in terms indicated by expressions like gods and men etc., for It is different from the body; It is 'imperceptible' through the senses such as eyes; It is 'omnipresent and unthinkable,' for though It exists everywhere in bodies such as those of gods and others, It cannot be conceived in terms of those bodies, as It is an entity of an altogether different kind; It is 'common to all beings' i.e., alike in all beings but different from the bodily forms distinguishing them; It is 'immovable' as It does not move out of Its unie nature, being unmodifiable, and therefore eternal. Such aspirants are further described as those who, 'subduing their senses' like the eye from their natural operations, look upon all beings of different forms as 'eal' by virtue of their knowledge of the sameness of the nature of the selves as knowers in all. Therefore they are not given 'to take pleasure in the misfortune of others,' as such feelings proceed from one's identification with one's own special bodily form.

Those who meditate on the Imperishable Principle (individual self) in this way, even they come to Me. It means that they also realise their essential self, which, in respect of freedom from Samsara, is like My own Self. So Sri Krsna will declare later on:  'Partaking of My nature' (14.2). Also the Sruti says:  'Untainted, he attains supreme eality' (Mun. U., 3.1.3).

Likewise He will declare the Supreme Brahman as being distinct from the freed self which is without modification and is denoted by the term 'Imperishable' (Aksara), and is described as unchanging (Kutastha). 'The Highest Person is other than this Imperishable' (15.16 - 17). But in the teaching in Aksara-vidya 'Now that higher science by which that Aksara is known' (Mun. U., 1.5) the entity that is designated by the term Aksara is Supreme Brahman Himself; for He is the source of all beings, etc. Greater is the difficulty of those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest. The path of the unmanifest is a psychosis of the mind with the unmanifest as its object. It is accomplished with difficulty by embodied beings, who have misconceived the body as the self. For, embodied beings mistake the body for the self.

The superiority of those who adore the Supreme Being is now stated clearly:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 12.4–12.5 jointly): Ye tu etc. upto avapyate.  On the other hand, those, who contemplate on the Self as the motionless Brahman - by them also all the attributes of Absolute  Lord are superimposed on the Self - the attributes that are indicated by the adjectives  'omni-present'  etc.  Therefore even the contemplators  of the  [attributeless]  Brahman  reach nothing but Me, of course.  However, the trouble they undergo, is much more.  For, they [first]  superimposed  on  the Self the actonary of attributes like absence-of-sin etc., and then comtemplate on It.  Thus, while without any effort  [on the part of the contemplator]  the Lord is readily available with the greatness due to the  host of self-accomplished attributes, these persons undergo two-fold trouble.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Samniyamya, by fully controlling, withdrawing; indriya-gramam, all the organs; and sarvatra, always at all times; sama-buddhayah, being even-minded-the even-minded are those whose minds remain eipoised in getting anything desirable or undesirable; te, they, those who are of this kind; ratah, engaged; sarva-bhuta-hite, in the welfare of all beings prapnuvanti, attain; mam, Me; eva, alone. As regards them it needs no saying that they attain Me, for it has been said, '৷৷.but the man of Knowledge is the very Self. (This is) My opinion' (7.18). It is certainly not proper to speak of being or not being the best among the yogis with regard to those who have attained identity with the Lord.
But,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
'If that is so, the answer to the question was already given by the verse "mayyavesya..." (12.2) that My worshippers are indeed the best; what then is the purpose of the subsequent statements?' - in anticipation of this, he says: 'bhavantu' (let it be) etc. This acceptance is filled with objection. The meaning is that it is not proper that Your worshippers alone are the best. To substantiate this, he asks: 'itaresam' (for others) etc. What is the fruit for the worshippers of the unmanifest? Is there liberation, or not? If not, it contradicts the quoted statements. If yes, how are Your worshippers the best, since the fruit is equal?
Objection: Since these adjectives (indefinable, etc.) are impossible anywhere other than Brahman, how can this verse be introduced as an answer to the question: 'what is the fruit for others?'
Answer: Since the qualities of being 'aksara' (imperishable) and 'avyakta' (unmanifest) are established in Maya (Prakriti), the commentator, establishing other adjectives in Maya, first explains 'anirdesyatvam' (indefinability) as 'shabdagocharam' (beyond words).
Objection: Let Isvara also be indefinable here.
Answer: In that case, Isvara is referred to by the word 'deva'. 'Daivam' is said to be the cause of the destruction of dharma. Thus, there would be tautology. Moreover, the word 'daiva' does not mean unseen destiny (adrsta), because it is mentioned separately as 'apare karma'.
The commentator adduces clear proof for the indefinability of Maya: 'uktam ca' (and it is declared) etc. 'Mahabhuta' refers to space and air. 'Upabhuta' refers to fire, water, and earth. 'Tada' means at the time of dissolution. Adjectives like 'ageless' explain its existence in dissolution. To show that this is not Brahman, he quotes: 'for this is indeed Prakriti'.
Now, to establish 'sarvatragam' (all-pervading) etc. in Maya, he says: 'sarvaga' etc. This is an abstract designation, or the word 'laksana' denotes its essential nature.
'Narayana-guna...' means that whose refuge is the qualities like Narayana's will. By this, Brahman is excluded.
By 'ageless, deathless' etc., the inert Pradhana (Prakriti of Samkhya) is excluded, as it cannot attain that state.
By 'incomprehensible', i.e., beyond the reach of the mind, 'acintyam' (unthinkable) is established.
By 'unborn, undecaying, imperishable', the state of 'dhruva' (eternal) is established.
'Asatyam' means existing in 'asat' (dissolution). 'Lalamam' means principal/chief. 'Dvitiya' means unique activity dependent solely on the Lord. 'Amurtitah' means free from physical body.
'Sarvasyah' (of the all-pervading) is a Vedic variation of gender (feminine), due to its being the presiding deity of beginningless ignorance.
The connection is: 'of the eternal darkness (Maya), the Purusha was born'.
This well-known darkness called Maya was entirely inactive, as if asleep, during dissolution. 'Abhutam' means unborn. By 'unperceived' etc., the absence of knowability through perception, inference, and scripture is stated. Being of an unknowable nature, it is 'unknowable by reasoning'. By this, all-pervading, unthinkable, and eternal are established.
If 'kutasthatva' and 'nityatva' are meant by the Gita text, then 'dhruvam' is a tautology. If 'kuta' means falsehood, then that which stays in it is impossible; hence he says: 'kute' (in space). The name of 'kuta' as denoting space was read earlier. Still, for firmness, he quotes the Sruti. According to the Sruti, it is feminine. 'She is all-pervading' is clear proof for the stated meaning. 'Niscala' means not fallen from her position. 'Visvaga' means the universe has gone into/taken refuge in her.
It should be known that these stated adjectives are for supporting the acceptance of that worship as a means to liberation.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'ye tu' (but those who) etc. The word 'tu' (but) highlights the difference. But those who worship the Imperishable (Aksara), which is a portion of the inner ruler's form, previously described as unmanifest because of having no name or form, having limited/measured bliss (ganitananda), and of a vast form. The distinction is clear: The Imperishable is unmanifest, whereas I am manifest. That (Imperishable) is indefinable, whereas I, by My own sweet will, am fit for extraordinary definition. That is all-pervading, whereas I am attainable only by My devotees. That is unthinkable, whereas I am thinkable by My devotees. That is Kutastha, i.e., common to all (universal), whereas I am unique (extraordinary). That is immovable, of a steady nature, whereas I am moving, wandering here and there. That is Dhruva (eternal), which is of the nature of spiritual power/status, whereas I am Isvara, the abode of that. Worshippers of that (Imperishable) attain Me, who am of the nature of Brahmananda (bliss of Brahman), or Sri (Lakshmi) herself who is of the nature of the eternal Self.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
In response to the query as to what excellence is there in the worshippers of Saguna Brahman over the knowers of Nirguna Brahman, such that they alone are considered the best of Yogis and highly favored, the Lord introduces the knowers of Nirguna Brahman in two verses beginning with 'ye tu' etc.
Those who worship Me as the Imperishable (Aksara) also attain Me alone - this is the connection with the second verse. The word 'tu' (but) is used to show distinction from the previous class of worshippers.
'Aksara' is the attributeless Brahman well-known in the Gargya-Brahmana (Vachaknavi-Brahmana). To describe It, seven adjectives are given:
'Anirdesyam' (indefinable) means incapable of being designated by words. Why? Because It is 'avyaktam' (unmanifest), free from the causes of verbal expression, viz. genus (jati), quality (guna), action (kriya), and relation (sambandha). Since words cannot express the attributeless except through these means, how is there an absence of genus etc.? In reply, he says: 'sarvatragam' (all-pervading). It is all-pervading and the cause of all, and hence free from genus, etc., because genus etc. are seen only in limited effects, and even space (akasha) etc. are accepted as effects.
Therefore, It is 'acintyam' (unthinkable), which is not the object of mental modifications, just as It is not the object of words. For Sruti says: 'from where words return along with the mind, without reaching It'.
If so, how can there be Sruti passages like: 'I ask for that Purusha known through the Upanishads', 'It is seen by the sharp intellect', and the Brahma Sutra 'because scripture is the source'?
It is explained: because when the final mental modification produced by the scriptural words, due to the relationship imagined by ignorance, has the pure Reality of the nature of supreme bliss reflected in it, there occurs the cessation of ignorance and its effects which are superimposed. Thus, by figurative usage, It is spoken of as an object.
Therefore, to show the superimposed relationship of ignorance in It, he says: 'kutastham'. That which is false but appears as real is called 'kuta' in common parlance, as in 'kuta-karsapana' (counterfeit coin) or 'kuta-saksitva' (false witness). Ignorance, also called Maya, together with the world of its effects, though false, appears as real to common people and is thus 'kuta'. That which remains as the substratum in it through an illusory relationship is 'kutastha' (situated in Kuta), i.e., the substratum of ignorance and its effects. By this, all inconsistencies are resolved.
Therefore, since all modifications are imagined by ignorance, the witness-consciousness which is their substratum is free from modifications, hence he says: 'acalam' (immovable). Movement means modification.
Because It is immovable, It is 'dhruvam' (eternal), unchanging and constant.
Such pure Brahman, 'paryupasate' (they worship) – meaning they remove the doubts about the means (pramana-gata-asambhava) by hearing (sravana), and doubts about the object (prameya-gata-asambhava) by reflection (manana), and then meditate to remove contrary ideas (viparita-bhavana). They make It the object of their meditation through 'nididhyasana' (profound contemplation), which is a continuous flow of similar thoughts without interruption, like a stream of oil, rejecting dissimilar thoughts.
How can there be rejection of dissimilar thoughts when there is contact between senses and objects? In response, he says: 'sanniyamya' (subduing). 'Sanniyamya' means withdrawing the group of senses (the aggregate of organs) from their respective objects. By this, the possession of qualities like control of mind and senses (shama-dama) is stated.
But when there is a latent desire for enjoying sense objects, how can the senses be withdrawn from them? In response, he says: 'sarvatra' (everywhere). Those whose minds are 'sama' (equal), i.e., free from joy and sorrow, attachment and aversion, in all objects. Because the cause of attachment, viz. ignorance, has been removed by right knowledge, and desire has been eradicated by the practice of seeing defects in sense objects, they are even-minded everywhere. By this, the higher dispassion (vashikara-samjna-vairagya) is stated.
Consequently, because they are free from aversion which is the cause of injury due to seeing the Self in all, they are 'intent on the welfare of all beings'. They have offered the gift of fearlessness to all beings with the mantra: 'Fearlessness to all beings from me, svaha'. In short, they are Sannyasis (renunciants). For the Smriti says: 'Having offered fearlessness to all beings, one should embrace Sannyasa'.
Those who are endowed with all these means, being themselves Brahman, attain Me, the Imperishable Brahman, through the doubtless direct realization which is the fruit of all means. Having already been of My form, they remain as My form alone upon the cessation of ignorance. This is supported by Srutis like: 'Being Brahman, he merges in Brahman', 'He who knows Brahman becomes Brahman', and also here: 'But the man of knowledge is My own Self, such is My opinion'.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
'sanniyamya' etc. is clear.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The commentator explains the method and fruit of worship. Restraining the group of senses, withdrawing them from their respective objects; being even-minded everywhere, i.e., at all times having an equal intellect free from attachment and aversion upon obtaining desirable or undesirable things; therefore being intent on the welfare of all beings, full of love for them; those who worship the Imperishable in this manner, attain Me, the Supreme Self. By the word 'eva' (indeed/alone), the Lord teaches their eligibility for direct liberation. Moreover, this attainment is to be understood as the recovery of something already possessed but forgotten (like a necklace around one's neck that was forgotten), and not like the attainment of a village, etc., which was not possessed. This is supported by the Sruti: 'Being already liberated, he is liberated', and by the Smriti: 'But the man of knowledge is indeed My own Self, such is My opinion.'

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The commentator speaks of the difficulty of those devoted to the Imperishable (individual self) through three verses beginning with 'ye tvaksaram'. Since the negation of all kinds of descriptions would result in contradictions of one's own statements, etc., he explains with reason the specific description intended for negation in its true form as 'dehād anyatayā' (different from the body). Although terms like 'gods' etc., are applied to the embodied self through the body, yet such a usage is impossible for the liberated self which is distinct and free from connection with Prakriti.
'Tata eva' means because of being different from the body. If complete imperceptibility were intended, it would contradict the word 'upasate' (worship) in the verse. Hence, he says: 'imperceptible through eyes and other organs'.
To resolve the contradiction with the Sruti statements about the atomic size of the soul, he explains 'sarvatragam' (all-pervading) as 'existing in the bodies of gods and others'. Alternatively, 'sarvatragam' is mentioned to introduce the thinkability of the object of negation; hence he says: 'though existing in the bodies of gods and others, it is unthinkable as it is of a different kind from those bodies'.
'Tata eva kutastham' means because it is distinct from them. Since it is common to all individual selves undergoing transmigrations, it is called 'kutastha' (situated on the anvil, i.e., common/universal). The views of those who interpret 'kuta' as Maya and explain it as the ruler of Maya or as existing in a heap, are refuted as they abandon the well-known meaning. Hence, to say 'steady like an anvil, free from growth and decay' is weak here.
If one objects that being common to all is not established at one time, and that even if it assumes bodies of all kinds over time, it does not occupy all bodies at once, so how is it common to all? In response, he says 'devadi'. The meaning is that the specific states of being a god etc., do not directly adhere to the self.
Since physical movement cannot be denied to the transmigrating self which departs from the body, he explains the word 'acalam' (immovable) as 'due to its unchangeable nature'. For perishability is pervaded by change; hence, by negating change, perishability is negated. This prevents tautology in the word 'dhruvam' (eternal).
Since the control of the mind is already established by 'upasate', he explains 'sanniyamya' (subduing) as the subduing of the external senses.
By referring to codes like 'non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, non-possession', he explains 'sarvatra' (everywhere).
Recalling 'the wise look with an equal eye on a dog, an outcaste, etc.' (5.18), he explains 'samabuddhayah' as 'having even-mindedness due to seeing the nature of knowledge as the sole form in all selves'.
'Tata eva' means because of even-mindedness.
Those who worship the Imperishable in this way, determining the individual self (denoted by the word 'Aksara') as the goal, and the Supreme Self as the means of attaining it.
'Te api' (they also) means even those who have a firm conviction in a goal other than Me.
'They indeed attain Me' means they attain the liberated self which is a non-separate attribute of Mine (apirthak-siddha-visesana) and is of the same form as Mine, as stated in 'The energy of Vishnu is supreme' and the Brahma Sutra 'due to its description as non-divided'.
Anticipating the request for proof of this view, he quotes the Sruti: 'Free from stain, he attains supreme equality'.
If it is asked how the word 'Aksara', which is commonly used for the Supreme Brahman in passages like 'By which that Aksara is known' (Mundaka 1.1.5) and 'The Imperishable, because It supports all up to space' (Brahma Sutra 1.3.10), is used here for the individual self, he replies: 'tatha ksarasabda...' because it is used so in passages like 'The imperishable and perishable is Hara' and 'The Kutastha is called Aksara' (15.16).
For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest (individual self), the difficulty is greater, because of the absence of a mind absorbed in Me. The mental state directed towards the unmanifest consists in the cessation of all senses.
If it is argued that having a body is possible even for sages like Sanaka, he says: 'embodied beings who have identified the self with the body'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Restraining the group of senses, subduing them, and being even-minded everywhere, whether in Me, in gods, in ordinary people, or in pleasure and pain, they who worship and meditate on Me, being intent on the welfare of all beings, they indeed attain Me alone. By the word 'eva' (alone), it is implied that they attain Me, though intervened by their connection with the Imperishable. And their lack of being the best among Yogis is also indicated.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'How is the Imperishable of this kind to be worshipped?' - in response to this, the Lord says: 'sanniyamya' (subduing) etc. 'Sarvatra' means at all times, always. By this, the continuity of meditation is stated. 'Indriya-gramam' means subduing the senses along with the mind, making them submissive to the Self in a state of oneness. The meaning is dissolving them into their cause. Those who have a mind (buddhi) that is 'sama' (calm and free from agitation) - such even-minded people also attain Me alone, the non-conceptual Supreme Brahman, the highest goal. The Sruti also says: 'When the five senses of knowledge, together with the mind, remain still, and the intellect does not stir - that, they say, is the supreme state' (Katha Upanishad 2.3.10). By the phrase 'engaged in the welfare of all beings', it is enjoined that Sannyasa, through the offering of fearlessness to all beings, is also a part of meditation.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
But those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendental form—to them, whose minds are always absorbed in Me, I provide what they lack and preserve what they have.

 Those who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, but who attempt to achieve the same goal by an indirect process, also ultimately achieve the same goal, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. “After many births the man of wisdom seeks refuge in Me, knowing that Vāsudeva is all.” When a person comes to full knowledge after many births, he surrenders unto Lord Kṛṣṇa. If one approaches the Godhead by the method mentioned in this verse, he has to control the senses, render service to everyone and engage in the welfare of all beings. It is inferred that one has to approach Lord Kṛṣṇa, otherwise there is no perfect realization. Often there is much penance involved before one fully surrenders unto Him. In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul, one has to cease the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working, etc. Then one comes to understand that the Supreme Soul is present everywhere. Realizing this, one envies no living entity – he sees no difference between man and animal because he sees soul only, not the outer covering. But for the common man, this method of impersonal realization is very difficult.