Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
ahaṃkāraṃ balaṃ darpaṃ kāmaṃ krodhaṃ ca saṃśritāḥ .
māmātmaparadeheṣu pradviṣanto.abhyasūyakāḥ

Word Meanings:
अहङ्कारम् - egoism
बलम् - power
दर्पम् - haughtiness
कामम् - lust
क्रोधम् - anger
च - and
संश्रिताः - resorting to egoism and pride
माम् - Me
आत्मपरदेहेषु - in their own bodies
प्रद्विषन्तः - hating
अभ्यसूयकाः - malicious people.

Life Application:
Given to egotism, power, pride, lust, anger, these malicious people hate Me in their own and others' bodies.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Given over to egoism, power, haughtiness, lust and anger, these malicious people hate Me in their own bodies and in those of others.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Given over to egoism, power, haughtiness, lust and anger, these malicious people hate Me in their own bodies and in those of others.

अहङ्कारम् egoism? बलम् power? दर्पम् haughtiness? कामम् lust? क्रोधम् anger? च and? संश्रिताः possessed of? माम् Me? आत्मपरदेहेषु in their own bodies and in those of others? प्रद्विषन्तः hating? अभ्यसूयकाः (these) malicious people.Commentary They are selfsufficient and puffed up with mental and material power. They pose too much. They resent it much if they are belittled. The body is dearer to them than everything else. They live solely for it. If anybody tries to thwart their plans or schemes they become bitterly hostile towards him. They take vengeance on him and try to kill him mercilessly. They are extremely meanminded. Just as darness seems to be denser after night sets in? so also as their,folly increases? their arrogance grows? their egoism develops? their pride swells? and their delusion augments day by day. They use brutal force to gain their selfish ends. They abuse and illtreat all those people who are truthful and charitable? and who are devoted to Me.Ahamkaram Egoism The selfarrogating principle? the effect or modification of ignorance. This is the source of all the defects and perversities in human nature and of all evil actions. Lust? anger? greed? pride and hypocrisy are all attendants of egoism. It is very difficult to overcome this dire enemy? but through Vichara (right eniry) it can be annihilated.These Asuras who are very egoistic on account of their deep ignorance esteem themselves very highly for the alities they possess and for those which they falsely superimpose upon themselves. They think that they are very great persons on account of the good alities which they have superimposed upon themselves and their egoism is increased thery. They try to humiliate others by using their financial supremacy. They will bribe people to give false evidence and do anything to attain their selfish ends.Balam Power accompanied by lust and attachment. The Asuras use their strength of body to humiliate and destroy others. If a man is not established in Yama (the fivefold canon of ethical perfection? consisting of noninjury? truthfulness? nonstealing? celibacy and noncovetousness)? if he has no purity of heart? if his mind is surcharged or saturated with evil tendencies? and if he gets power of any sort? he will misuse or abuse it and try to humiliate or abuse others. Powers or Siddhis are bound to come if one practises concentration of mind. If he is endowed with Yama? he will never misuse them and so he will never have a downfall. That is the reason why Patanjali Maharshi says Powers are obstacles on the path of Yoga. Shun them ruthlessly. March onwards to the goal. Climb the ladder of Yoga till you attain the highest state of superconsciousness or Godconsciousness. Do not look back. Have no memories of the past.Yama is the very foundation of Yoga. Get yourself established in Yama before you take to concentration and meditation. Many aspirants get a downfall because they do not practise Yama to begin with. They jump at once to the practice of concentration and meditation. This is sad mistake.Darpa Haughtiness. A man whose heart is filled with haughtiness becomes very insolent and unjust and assumes an overbearing and domineering attitude towards others he never respects the elders? Gurus and others. This is a peculiar vice that has its seat in the mind. When this evil ality manifests itself? one swerves from the path of virtue.Krodha Anger manifests itself when one gets something unplesant and when he comes across something disagreeable.These Asuras hate Me? the Lord Who dwells in their own bodies as the silent witness of their thoughts and actions. They think that I am also a human being and hate Me. They do not understand My allpervading and imperishable nature. They do not care at all to know and follow. My ?nds or the injunctions given in the Vedas and the Smritis. If anyone violates My ?nds given in the scriptures? it is surely tantamount to an act of hatred towards Me. These people are very malicious. They have evil intentions or impure motives. They are jealous of those persons who are virtuous and who tread the path of righteousness. Their hearts burn when they notice good alities in others. This is Matsarya? a form of jealousy. If a man superimposes evil alities on a virtuous man who is endowed with good alities? this is Asuya. If his heart burns when he sees a wealthy or prosperous man? this is Irshya.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Puffed up by power and inordinate conceit, swayed by lust and wrath, these wicked people hate Me Who am within them, as I am within all.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Given over to egoism, power, haughtiness, lust and anger, these malicious people hate Me in their own bodies and in those of others.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that when a man is ruled by ego, he deteriorates below the level of animals. Driven by desire and anger, he rejects all moral values. Such people hate God who resides in their own and others' bodies. Since God manifests in a pure heart, their immoral lifestyle and hatred towards others are equivalent to hating the Divine within themselves. By violating spiritual rules, they destroy their own peace and create chaos in society.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Clinging fast to egotism, force, pride, craving, and anger, these envious men hate Me in the bodies of their own and of others.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Depending on their egoism, power and pride, and also of desire and wrath, these malicious men hate Me in their own bodies and in those of others.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Resorting to egotism, power, arrogance, passion and anger, hating Me in their own and others' bodies, (they become) [As the finite verb is missing in the verse, we have supplied 'they become'. S. adds the verb prabhavanti, wax strong, from verse 9, and constructs the last portion thus: '৷৷.the envious ones wax strond.' Following S. S., however, one may combine this verse with the preceding verse by taking 'perform sacrifices' as the finite verb.-Tr.'] envious by nature.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya explains that they hate the Supreme Lord residing in all bodies. They claim that Vishnu is not the director of everything, arguing that if He were, He would force them to do things according to His will, showing their ignorance of karma.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that Asuri individuals rely on false qualities and bodily strength to oppress others. Their hatred towards God is shown by their violation of scriptural commands (the Vedas and Smritis), which are the words of God. They mock righteous people out of envy.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Taking refuge in egotism, stubbornness, pride, desire and anger, these people hate Me, the Indweller residing in their own bodies and in the bodies of others, and find fault in others' virtues.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that Asuri people rely on pride, stubbornness, and anger to rule over others, believing that humility leads to weakness. By disobeying scriptural rules (which are God's commandments), they directly express their hatred towards God. They ignore the good thoughts arising from the Indweller in their own hearts and physically abuse other living beings, which is equivalent to hating God who resides in all bodies. They also mock and find faults in the lives of holy saints.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
They depend on their egoism in the form of 'I can do everything without the help of anyone'; likewise, in performing everything they depend on their power, 'My power is sufficient'; hence pride takes the following form, 'There is nobody like myself. Desire takes the form of, 'Because I am so, everything is fulfilled by my mere desire.' 'Wrath consits in conceiving, 'I shall slay those who cause evil to me.' Thus, depending on themselves, they evince malice towards Me, the Supreme Person abiding in their own bodies as well as in the bodies of others; and they hate Me. They endeavour to invent fallacious arguments against My existence, and being unable to tolerate Me, they perform all acts like sacrifices etc., depending only on their egoism.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.17–16.20 jointly): Atmasambhavitah etc. upto gatim.  They pretend to perform sacrifices :  The meaning is that their sacrifice is fruitless.  Indeed all is ruined because of their anger.  Or, namayjna  [may mean]  'the sacrifices which are in name only'.  Or, it [may denote] those sacrifices that are performed for one's name sake i.e., for one's reputation, because of which one gets the appellation as  'He is performer  of [such and such]  sacrifices'  These sacrifices, performed out of hypocricy alone, do not , however fetch any fruit.  Becasue these persons are rugged with anger etc., they hate people and by that they hate Me only [in fact]. For, I, the Vasudeva (the Universal Soul), dwell every-where.  Entertaining hatred towards their  own Soul, they perform action, that is hostile to themselves, and responsible for their own fall into the hells.  These persons I hurl into nothing but the demoniac wombs.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Ahankaram, egotism-that which considers the Self to which have been imputed actual and imaginary alities as 'I am this', which is called ignorance and is most painful, and is the source of all ills as also of all evil deeds; so also balam, power, which seeds to defear others and is associated with passion and desire; darpam, arrogance, a particular defect abiding in the mind, on the upsurge of which one transgresses righteousness; kamam, passion with regard to women and others; krodham, anger at things tha are undesirable;-samsritah, resorting to these and other great evils; and further, pradvisantah, hating; mam, Me, God-transgression of My ?nds is hatred (towards Me); indulging in that, atma-para-dehesu, in their own and others' bodies as the witness of their intellects and actions; (they become) abhyasuyakah, envious by nature, intolerant of the alities of those who tread the right path.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that Asuri people reject God's scriptures, which is equivalent to hating God. By performing vanity-sacrifices without faith, they unnecessarily torture their own bodies (containing the Lord as witness) and cruelly sacrifice animals, committing violence against the Divine presence in all.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that due to lack of faith in showy sacrifices, they only cause pain to their own bodies. In performing illegal animal sacrifice, they commit violence against the consciousness (Me) residing in those bodies, showing their hatred towards God.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that by violating scriptural ordinances, they express hatred toward Me. Their so-called sacrifices only torture their own bodies and commit violence against the life of others. They are jealous of those on the right path.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that their egotism rejects the fact that God is the supreme director of all actions. By abusing other living entities and ignoring scriptural ordinances, they express direct hatred towards the Supreme Person residing in all hearts.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that they rely on their own false power and desires. They hate God residing in all bodies because they treat other living beings with cruelty and show no devotion to the Lord.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'egotism' is the belief that 'I am the supreme'. They torture Me in their own body by fasting unnecessarily or performing corrupt penance, and in other bodies by committing acts of violence and animal slaughter.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demons become envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in their own bodies and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme against the real religion.

 A demoniac person, being always against God’s supremacy, does not like to believe in the scriptures. He is envious of both the scriptures and the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is caused by his so-called prestige and his accumulation of wealth and strength. He does not know that the present life is a preparation for the next life. Not knowing this, he is actually envious of his own self, as well as of others. He commits violence on other bodies and on his own. He does not care for the supreme control of the Personality of Godhead, because he has no knowledge. Being envious of the scriptures and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he puts forward false arguments against the existence of God and denies the scriptural authority. He thinks himself independent and powerful in every action. He thinks that since no one can equal him in strength, power or wealth, he can act in any way and no one can stop him. If he has an enemy who might check the advancement of his sensual activities, he makes plans to cut him down by his own power.