Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
sañjaya uvāca .
ityahaṃ vāsudevasya pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ .
saṃvādamimamaśrauṣamadbhutaṃ romaharṣaṇam

Word Meanings:
इति - thus
अहम् - I
वासुदेवस्य - of Krishna
पार्थस्य - of Arjuna
च - and
महात्मनः - highsouled
संवादम् - dialogue
इमम् - this
अश्रौषम् - have heard
अद्भुतम् - wonderful
रोमहर्षणम् - which causes the hair

Life Application:
Sanjaya said: Thus I have heard this wonderful, thrilling dialogue between Vasudeva and high-souled Partha.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Sanjaya said: Thus have I heard this wonderful dialogue between Vasudeva and the high-souled Partha, which causes my hair to stand on end.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Sanjaya said  Thus I have heard this wonderful dialogue between Krishna and the high-souled Arjuna, which causes the hair to stand on end.

इति thus? अहम् I? वासुदेवस्य of Krishna? पार्थस्य of Arjuna? च and? महात्मनः highsouled? संवादम् dialogue? इमम् this? अश्रौषम् (I) have heard? अद्भुतम् wonderful? रोमहर्षणम् which causes the hair to stand on end.Commentary Wonderful because it deals with Yoga and transcendental spiritual matters that pertain to the mysterious immortal Self.Whenever good? higher emotions manifest themselves in the heart the hair stands on end. Devotees often experience this horripilation.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Sanjaya told: "Thus have I heard this rare, wonderful and soul-stirring discourse of the Lord Shri Krishna and the great-souled Arjuna.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Before the beginning of the Gita's instruction, Arjuna had said: 'I shall not fight.' At the end of the teaching, in the previous verse, he declared: 'I shall act according to Your word.' Thus the treatment of the disease was complete and with it, the Gita scripture ends. Sanjaya, who was narrating the events to the blind king Dhritarashtra, now expresses his own ecstatic joy. He recalls the wonderful, hair-raising dialogue between Lord Krishna (Vasudeva) and the high-souled Arjuna (Partha) which he was blessed to hear through the grace of Sage Vyasa. Sanjaya's words contain a subtle warning to Dhritarashtra: when Arjuna is now ready and free from delusion, the victory of the Pandavas is certain, which means the destruction of Dhritarashtra's sons. Yet, the blind king remains deaf to these moral hints. Sanjaya now expresses his gratitude to Sage Vyasa.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Sanjaya said  Thus I have heard this wonderful and thrilling dailogue of  Vasudeva and the mighty-minded son of  Prtha.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Sanjaya said  Thus have I heard this wondrous dialogue between Vasudeva and the great-minded Arjuna, which makes my hair stand on end.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Sanjaya said  I thus heard this conversation of Vasudeva and of the great-souled Partha, which is unie and makes one's hair stand on end.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sanjaya said: Thus have I heard this wonderful dialogue between Vasudeva and the high-souled Partha, which causes my hair to stand on end. Having listened to this dialogue, Sanjaya is filled with wonder and joy, reporting it to Dhritarashtra.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Sanjaya said: Thus have I heard this wonderful dialogue between Vasudeva and the high-souled Partha, which causes my hair to stand on end. Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains Sanjaya's state of mind: 1. Heard this dialogue (saṃvādamimamaśrauṣam): Sanjaya listened to the entire conversation between Krishna and Arjuna from beginning to end. 2. Wonderful and hair-raising (adbhutaṃ romaharṣaṇam): The dialogue was so divine and mysterious that it filled Sanjaya with ecstasy, causing his hair to stand on end. 3. The term 'high-souled' (mahātmanaḥ) for Arjuna: Arjuna is called high-souled because he completely surrendered to the Lord and understood His supreme truth, thus qualifying for the Lord's special grace.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Sanjaya said  Thus, in this way have I been hearing, this wondrous and thrilling dialogue, as it took place between Vasudeva, the son of Vasudeva, and His paternal aunt's son Arjuna, who is a Mahatman, one possessed of a great intelligence, and who has resorted to the feet of Sri Krsna.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.74–18.78 jointly): Ityaham etc. upto matir mama While concluding the [Krsna-Arjuna]  dialogue with Sanjaya's speech, the [sage Vyasa] teaches this :  What leads to the Absolute Brahman is nothing but the recollection of the purport of the dialoguea recollection that is led finally to the status of the highly vivid, direct cognition admitting no differentiation  [between its subject and object],  resulting from the continuity helped by the series of incessant contemplations [on the purport of the dialogue] according to the method of firmly fixing.  Thus, only through the recollection of the dialogue of the Bhagavat and Arjuna, the Reality could be reached and due to that come fortunes, voctories and prosperity.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Aham, I; iti, thus; asrausam, heard; imam, this; samvadam, conversation, as has been narrated; vasudevasya, of Vasudeva; and mahatmanah, parthasya, of the great-soulded Partha; which is adbhutam, unie, extremely wonderful; and roma-harsanam, makes one's hair stand on end.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Having related the dialogue to Dhritarashtra, Sanjaya resumes: 'ityaham...'. I have heard this dialogue between the two.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The philosophical teaching is concluded. Connecting it back to the narrative, Sanjaya says: 'ityaham...'. The dialogue is wonderful (adbhutam) because it is unprecedented and causes the heart to swell with amazement. It is hair-raising (romaharsanam) because of the bodily horripilation generated by spiritual joy.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Having related the Krishna-Arjuna dialogue to Dhritarashtra, Sanjaya continues: 'iti...'. I have heard this dialogue which is wonderful and causes hair to stand on end. The rest is clear.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The dialogue between Krishna and Partha is completed. To show the narrative flow, Sanjaya says: I have heard this dialogue between Vasudeva, the Lord of all, and Arjuna, the noble soul. It is extremely wonderful and causes my hair to stand on end. How blessed is Vasudeva in whose house the Lord incarnated, and how blessed is Pritha whose son received such grace.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Sanjaya connects this back to Dhritarashtra's first question: 'What did my sons and the sons of Pandu do?'. By calling Arjuna 'high-souled', Sanjaya points out that Arjuna took shelter of the Lord. The dialogue was so extraordinary that it caused hair to stand on end. Sanjaya's narration is perfectly truthful and authentic.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sanjaya narrates this dialogue to show that although Dhritarashtra is full of envy and will not reap the benefits of this wisdom, Sanjaya himself is filled with ecstasy. He calls it wonderful and hair-raising because of the spiritual joy it generated in his heart.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The teaching is completed. Continuing the narrative, Sanjaya says: 'ityaham...'. The dialogue is wonderful because it causes amazement, and hair-raising because it generates a physical thrill out of spiritual delight.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Sañjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is standing on end.

 In the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā , Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired from his secretary Sañjaya, “What happened on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra?” The entire study was related to the heart of Sañjaya by the grace of his spiritual master, Vyāsa. He thus explained the theme of the battlefield. The conversation was wonderful because such an important conversation between two great souls had never taken place before and would not take place again. It was wonderful because the Supreme Personality of Godhead was speaking about Himself and His energies to the living entity, Arjuna, a great devotee of the Lord. If we follow in the footsteps of Arjuna to understand Kṛṣṇa, then our life will be happy and successful. Sañjaya realized this, and as he began to understand it, he related the conversation to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Now it is concluded that wherever there is Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, there is victory.