Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
iti guhyatamaṃ śāstramidamuktaṃ mayānagha .
etadbuddhvā buddhimānsyātkṛtakṛtyaśca bhārata

Word Meanings:
इति - thus
गुह्यतमम् - most secret
शास्त्रम् - science
इदम् - this
उक्तम् - has been taught
मया - by Me
अनघ - O sinless one
एतत् बुद्ध्वा - knowing this
बुद्धिमान् - wise
स्यात् - will become
कृतकृत्यः - accomplished all the duties
च - and
भारत - O Bharata.

Life Application:
Thus has this most secret science been declared; knowing this, one becomes wise and completes all duty.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Thus, this most secret scripture has been taught by Me, O sinless one; by understanding this, a person becomes wise and all his duties are accomplished, O descendant of Bharata.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Thus, this most secret science has been taught by Me, O sinless one; on knowing this, a man becomes wise, and all his duties are accomplished, O Arjuna.

इति thus? गुह्यतमम् most secret? शास्त्रम् science (teaching)? इदम् this? उक्तम् has been taught? मया by Me? अनघ O sinless one? एतत् बुद्ध्वा knowing this? बुद्धिमान् wise? स्यात् will become? कृतकृत्यः (who has) accomplished all the duties? च and? भारत O Bharata.Commentary Guhyatamam Most profound secret.Buddhiman means here a knower of the Self or Atmart.The knowledge of the Self which gives emancipation from the round of birth and death? and freedom from the bonds of Karma is eulogised in this verse. If this most profound teaching is rightly understood? known or realised? it makes a man wise and gives him illumination. After this there is nothing left for him to know or strive for. He has reached the goal of life or the aim of human existence. He has arrived at the end of his journey. His endeavour for Selfrealisation is over. He has attained perfection. He has complete knowledge of the Supreme Being. He gets Brahma Jnana. He moves in the consciousness of the Divine. He beholds the Self everywhere. He lives in Brahman. He regards all activities as His divine play.When one realises Brahman? he has discharged all the duties of life. He is liberated from the bonds of Karma. He becomes a Jivanmukta or illumined  sage who has transcended the bodyconsciousness? the three alities of Nature? the three states of consciousness (wakeful state? dream and deep sleep)? the pairs of opposites and the cycle of birth and death. He knows fully well that rirth has been destroyed? that what has to be done has been accomplished? that lifes highest goal has been reached and that he has nothing more to do or to learn. He has understood the profound mystery of life -- the riddle of this universe. He is a Sarvavit or allknower.The whole of the Gita is called science? yet the fifteenth discourse alone is here declared as the science for the sake of eulogising it. The fifteenth discourse contains the intessence of the Gita? the Upanishads and the Vedas. This is the butter churned from the milk of the Vedas. It has been said that? He who knows the peepul tree knows the Veda (XV.1). The Lord has also said? It is I Who am to be known by all the Vedas (XV.15). Only when a man knows this science as taught above does he become wise -- but not otherwise. Whatever duty a Brahmana of the highest birth has to do? all that has been doen when one attains the knowledge of the Self. All actions in their entirety culminate in knowledge (IV.33). This is the fulfilment of the birth? particularly of a Brahmana because the twicorn accomplishes all his duties only by attaining to this? but not otherwise? says Manu Smriti.As you have heard from Me this truth about the Supreme Being? you are a happy man and you have done all your duties you have attained Selfrealistion.By using the words Anagha and Bharata? Lord Krishna hints that even when an ordinary man who knows this fifteenth discourse can attain knowledge of the Self and become a Kritakritya? then what to say of Arjuna who was sinless and who was born in a noble family with divine attributes The Lord? by using the word Anagha? also indicates that the Guru who is a knower of Brahman should instruct the most profound secret (the science of the Self) only to alified persons who are free from impurities of the heart or tossing of the mind? who are calm and endowed with the four means of salvation. The man of impure mind will not be able to grasp the truth. The sinful man with his perverted intellect will distort the truth and thus pave the way for the destruction of himself and his followers.Thus in the Upanishads of the glorious Bhagavad Gita? the science of the Eternal? the scripture of Yoga? the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna? ends the fifteenth discourse entitledThe Yoga of the Supreme Spirit.   ,,

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Thus, O Sinless One, I have revealed to thee this most mystic knowledge. He who understands gains wisdom and attains the consummation of life."

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In this concluding verse of the chapter, Lord Krishna says that He has taught Arjuna the most secret knowledge. This knowledge is called secret or mysterious not because it should not be disclosed to anyone, but because Brahman is beyond the reach of the senses, and cannot be known by mere intellect through direct perception or inference. Therefore, it remains a mystery to the uninitiated. It can only be realized through the instruction of a teacher who is well-versed in the scriptures and established in Self-realization. By addressing Arjuna as 'Anagha' (sinless), the Lord indicates that he is fit for Self-knowledge. Any action, emotion, or thought that causes agitation, regret, or guilt in our mind is called sin; such states of mind lack the subtleness and alertness required for Self-inquiry. The person who knows his Purushottama nature becomes wise (Buddhiman). This means that after gaining this knowledge, he makes no errors in understanding the true nature of things and in making decisions regarding action, thereby creating no confusion or sorrow for himself or for others in society. The fruit of the knowledge of the Divine is Kritakrityata—the state of complete satisfaction that arises upon achieving the goal of life, after which no duty or object of attainment remains. This verse assures the fit seeker of this supreme fruit of Self-knowledge.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Thus the most secret scripture has been taught by Me, O sinless one;  by understanding this, let a man become wise and also become one who has accomplished what reires to be accomplished, O descendant of Bharata !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Thus, O sinless one, has this most mysterious doctrine been imparted by Me. By understanding this, a man will become truly wise and will have fulfilled his duty.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O sinless one, this most secret scripture has thus been uttered by Me. Understanding this, one becomes wise and has his duties fulfilled, O scion of the Bharata dynasty.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains: The Lord praises the knowledge taught in this chapter by declaring that understanding it leads to the fulfillment of all human endeavors. Although the entire Gita is a scripture, this chapter is specifically called 'Sastram' (scripture) to highlight that it contains the essence of all Vedic teachings. By knowing the truth of the Supreme Self, a person becomes truly wise and achieves 'Kritakrityata' (the state of having accomplished all duties), meaning there is no further necessity for action or striving.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O sinless Arjuna! Thus, this most secret scripture has been taught by Me. O descendant of Bharata, on knowing this, a man becomes wise and has all his duties accomplished.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that Arjuna is addressed as 'Anagha' (sinless) because he was free from the fault of finding defects (asuya) in others. Finding faults is a sin that purifies nothing but defiles the intellect. The most confidential secrets are shared only with those who are free from such defect-finding tendencies. If such a secret is disclosed to a fault-finder, they will misinterpret it and see fault in the speaker as well, accusing them of self-praise. The Lord calls this chapter 'Guhyatamam Sastram' (most secret scripture). It is called 'most secret' because the Lord here reveals His supreme, innermost identity as Purushottama, which is usually kept concealed. It is called 'scripture' because it describes the nature of the world, the individual soul, and the Supreme Divine, which are the main subjects of all scriptures. By realizing this truth, one becomes wise and gets 'Kritakrityata' (the state of fulfillment). The word 'Kritakritya' signifies that the purpose of human life has been attained, and there is nothing more to be done, known, or acquired. Whether one follows the path of Action (Karma Yoga), Knowledge (Jnana Yoga), or Devotion (Bhakti Yoga), the ultimate result is this state of complete fulfillment.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Thus, this Sastra, the most mysterious of all mysteries and which teaches My aspect as the Supreme Person, has been imparted to you by Me, as you are worthy to receive it because you are sinless. By understanding this, a man will become truly wise and will have fulfilled his duty. Whatever wisdom has to be cultivated for attaining Me, all that should be taken as cultivated and that whatever duty has to be fulfilled in that connection - all that is to be taken as fulfilled by knowing this (the Purusottama Vidya). He gets all spiritual fulfilment by this knowledge, except the direct vision of Purusottama. [Probably the idea is that direct vision comes only when the body falls at the end of the antum of Karma that has brought it into existence. Before that only the state of the Sthitaprajna can be attained. The thin veil of residual Karma still stands in the way.]

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Iti  etc.  The most secret [scripture] : Because it explains  the oneness of all.  One becomes a man of wisdom by knowing this only and not by the knowledge of worldly affairs. One becomes a man of success by just understanding this, and not even by the deeds like the total victory over the foes, earning  wealth, enjoying women and so on.  The word ca  'also'  indicates a wonder.  Has it not been witnessed that  [always] one becomes a man of  success by what has been accomplished ?  But it is strange that [in the present case one becomes a man of success] by just what has been realised.
 
The word iti  'thus'  indicates the conclusion of the treatise.  For, what is to be taught has come to an end completely.  That is why in the Sixteenth Chapter the eligibility of the pupil, Arjuna, is exclusively dealt with; and nothing new is taught.  The intention  [of that chapter] is to say only this much :  'The divine wealth is just of that nature;  but the devilish wealth born of illusion is of this nature; you (Arjuna) are however endowed with the divine wealth of wisdom'.  Hence [the Lord] is going to say  'Don't  worry.  [You are endowed] with the divine wealth'  (XVI, 5).  That is why earlier in the context of explaining the clash between the wisdom and ignorance this has been indicated [by me (Ag.)]:  'It is the confrontation between the wisdom and ignorance that has been detailed under the pretext of [describing] the wars between the  gods and devils.'  So, while dealing essentially with the ality of a pupil, other subjects are mentioned incidentally.  So also the pair of chapters (Ch. XVII &  XVIII) would follow.  But the teaching [proper] has come to an end completely here itself.  For what is to be achieved is nothing but serving (attaining) the Absolute Lord-the serving, which is of the nature of total  absorption into Him by one's entire being.  All other things are only to achieve this end.  This has been explained earlier.  The Supreme Happiness is indeed nothing but a complete absorption into the Supreme Lord by one's entire being.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
This guhyatamam, most secret, i.e. most mystical;- what is that?-sastram, scripture-. Although the Gita as a whole is spoken of as the scripture, still this chapter itself is here referred to as such, and this for eulogy as is evident from the context. For, not only has the entire meaning of the scripture Gita been stated here in brief, but the whole purport of the Vedas also has been comprehended here. And it has been said, 'He who realizes it is a knower of the Vedas' (1), 'I alone am the object to be known through all the Vedas' (15). (Thus, this most secret scripture) iti uktam, has thus been uttered; maya, by Me; anagha, O sinless one.
O scion of the Bharata dynasty, buddhva, under-standing; etat, this, the scripture which has the purport as has been revealed; syat, one becomes; buddhiman, wise; and krta-krtyah, has his duties fulfilled; but not otherwise. The meaning is that what-ever a Brahmana has to do as a conseence of his special birth (as a Brahmana), all that becomes accomplished when the reality of the Lord is known. The idea is that nobody's duties become fulfilled in any other way. And it has been said, 'O son of Prtha, all actions in their totality culminate in Knowledge' (4.33). There is also a saying from Manu:
'This, verily, is the fulfilment of a Brahmana in particular. For, by getting this, a twice-born has his duties fulfilled; not otherwise' (Ma. Sm. 12.93).
Since you have heard from Me this truth about the supreme Reality, therefore, O scion of the Bharata dynasty, you have achieved your Goal!

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains: The Lord calls the teaching of this chapter 'most secret' (guhyatamam) because it contains the essence of all Vedic scriptures and reveals the true nature of Purushottama, who is distinct from Kshara and Akshara. Addresssing Arjuna as 'Anagha' indicates that those who are free from mental and physical impurities are alone fit to receive this knowledge. By understanding this, a person becomes truly wise and achieves 'Kritakrityata'—the state of having completed all duties, which is the state of total bliss and devotion.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains: The Lord concludes this chapter by praising the knowledge of the Supreme Self taught here. It is called 'most secret' (guhyatamam) because it is the most confidential teaching of the Upanishads and cannot be grasped by those who lack purity of mind. Addressed to Arjuna as 'sinless' (Anagha) to indicate his eligibility, this teaching brings the highest wisdom. On knowing this, a seeker becomes wise and attains the fulfillment of life (Kritakrityah), meaning that all duties are completed because the goal of all actions is the attainment of Self-knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains: The Lord summarizes the teaching by praising its efficacy. This chapter is called the 'most secret scripture' because it presents the core truth of the entire Gita and the Vedas. By realizing this truth, a person becomes truly wise and achieves the ultimate fulfillment of human life, leaving no duties unaccomplished.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanapati explains: The Lord states that this chapter is called 'most secret scripture' because it establishes the non-duality of the Self and Brahman in a concise manner. By addressing Arjuna as sinless (Anagha), the Lord points out that only a pure mind can reflect this ultimate truth. Knowing this truth makes one wise and free from all worldly duties, as all actions find their culmination in this knowledge.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains: The Lord declares that this secret science (Sastram) has been revealed to Arjuna because of his sinless nature. Knowing this most confidential truth of the Purushottama is the key to becoming wise and achieving the state of Kritakrityata. Here, Kritakrityata means that one has performed all spiritual endeavors required for attaining the Lord, and there is nothing further to be done except to wait for the final liberation at the fall of the body.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains: The knowledge of Purushottama is the highest secret. One who is free from sin and delusion, and knows Him as the Supreme Person, achieves the end of all actions. He becomes wise and completely successful in his life's purpose.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains: This chapter is called the 'most secret scripture' because it reveals the identity of the Supreme Person, who is distinct from Kshara and Akshara. Knowing this makes a person wise and accomplisher of all his duties (Kritakrityah) since the ultimate purpose of human birth is to know this Supreme Reality.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless one, and it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this will become wise, and his endeavors will know perfection.

 The Lord clearly explains here that this is the substance of all revealed scriptures. And one should understand this as it is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus one will become intelligent and perfect in transcendental knowledge. In other words, by understanding this philosophy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engaging in His transcendental service, everyone can become freed from all contaminations of the modes of material nature. Devotional service is a process of spiritual understanding. Wherever devotional service exists, the material contamination cannot coexist. Devotional service to the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the same because they are spiritual; devotional service takes place within the internal energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is said to be the sun, and ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is present, there is no question of darkness. Therefore, whenever devotional service is present under the proper guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, there is no question of ignorance. Everyone must take to this consciousness of Kṛṣṇa and engage in devotional service to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comes to this position of understanding Kṛṣṇa and engages in devotional service, however intelligent he may be in the estimation of some common man, he is not perfectly intelligent. The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha, “O sinless one,” means that unless one is free from all sinful reactions it is very difficult to understand Kṛṣṇa. One has to become free from all contamination, all sinful activities; then he can understand. But devotional service is so pure and potent that once one is engaged in devotional service he automatically comes to the stage of sinlessness. While one is performing devotional service in the association of pure devotees in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there are certain things which require to be vanquished altogether. The most important thing one has to surmount is weakness of the heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire to lord it over material nature. Thus one gives up the transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord. The second weakness of the heart is that as one increases the propensity to lord it over material nature, he becomes attached to matter and the possession of matter. The problems of material existence are due to these weaknesses of the heart. In this chapter the first five verses describe the process of freeing oneself from these weaknesses of heart, and the rest of the chapter, from the sixth verse through the end, discusses puruṣottama-yoga. Thus end the Bhaktivedanta s to the Fifteenth Chapter of the Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā in the matter of Puruṣottama-yoga, the Yoga of the Supreme Person.