Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
mama yonirmahad brahma tasmingarbhaṃ dadhāmyaham .
sambhavaḥ sarvabhūtānāṃ tato bhavati bhārata

Word Meanings:
मम - My
योनिः - womb
महत् - the great
ब्रह्म - the great material nature (Brahman)
तस्मिन् - in that
गर्भम् - germ
दधामि - bears
अहम - I
संभवः - the birth
सर्वभूतानाम् - of all beings
ततः - thence
भवति - is
भारत - O descendant of Bharata

Life Application:
Understand great nature as the womb in which the divine seed is placed, giving birth to all beings.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Hey India! My Mahad Brahmarup Prakriti is the vagina (of the ghosts) in which I conceive; From this all ghosts are born.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
My womb is the great Brahma; in that I place the germ; thence, O Arjuna, is the birth of all beings.

मम My? योनिः womb? महत् the great? ब्रह्म Brahma? तस्मिन् in that? गर्भम् germ? दधामि bears? अहम I? संभवः the birth? सर्वभूतानाम् of all beings? ततः thence? भवति is? भारत O descendant of Bharata (Arjuna).Commentary My womb is the great Nature. The cosmos is evolved out of His Nature. Nature is called the great Brahma for She is the resting place of the five subtle elements and also the Mahat (cosmic mind). She is callled the great Brahma? because through Her the whole manifestation takes place.All changes arise out of this great Nature. So She has got the name Mulaprakriti or Primordial Nature or the original principle. From the point of view of the Unmanifest She is called Avyakta. The Vedantins call Her Maya (illusion). The Sankhyas call Her Prakriti.This Prakriti is called great because She is greater than all Her effects. This Nature? made of the three alities? is the material cause of all beings. As She is the source or cause of all Her,modifications and also nourishes all the modifications with Her energy? She is called Brahma.I place in it (the Mahabrahma) the embryo of life then all beings begin to come to life therefrom. In the great Brahma or Nature I place the germ or the seed for the birth of Hiranyagarbha and the seed gives birth to all beings. The birth of Hiranyagarbha or Brahma (the Creator) gives rise to the birth of beings. The Primordial Nature is like the clay. She cannot create the forms Herself. She gives birth to Brahma Who creates all beings just as the potter creates various forms from the clay. I am endowed with the two Saktis? viz.? the superior and the inferior Natures (Cf. VII. 4 and 5)? the field and its knower. I unite these two (the Spirit and the matter). The individual soul comes under the influence of the limiting adjuncts? viz.? ignorance? desire and action. On account of ignorance (Avidya)? the individual soul forgets his original divine nature? gets himself entangled in the meshes of desire (Kama) and action (Karma)? and revolves in the wheel of birth and death. The individual soul turns towards ignorance without knowing his own true divine nature. The Jiva (individual soul) being overpowered by ignorance and the modifications? forgets its pristine purity and moves in various forms.The Primordial Nature or the Unmanifested is a dark matrix with infinite potentialities. It is not a substance. Sound and energy are in an undifferentiated state in It. The whole world gets involved into It during the cosmic dissolution. There is no relationship of substance or ality between It and the three Gunas. The alities are the Mulaprakriti and the latter is the former in a state of poise or eilibrium. This manifested world of the three alities is compared to a twisted rope of three colours? viz.? white? red and black. Each colour represents a Guna. Sattvic is white? Rajas is red and Tamas is black. The three are not in a state of eilibrium in the manifested world.Water and the seed coming in contact with the earth produce sprouts which grow into trees. In the womb of Nature? the seed develops into the eightfold elements -- earth? water? fire? air? ether? mind? intellect and egoism. The first fruit of the contact of Nature with the soul is the MahatTattva or intellect. From intellect mind is born from mind egoism from egoism? the five elements.There are four classes of beings? viz.? Jarayuja? Andaja? Svedaja and Udbhijja. The Jarayuja is born of the placenta (viviparous). Human beings? cows? elephants? horses? etc.? belong to this class. In this variety the five senses of knowledge exist. The Andaja is born of eggs (oviparous). In this variety the elements of wind and ether predominate. Lice come under the category of Svedaja they are born of sweat. In this variety fire and water predominate. Trees that are born of seeds are classified under the head Udbhijja in this variety earth and water predominate. (Cf.VII.6IX.17XV.7)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The eternal Cosmos is My womb, in which I plant the seed, from which all beings are born, O Prince!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Mahad Brahm Yoni: Here Mahad Brahm has been called the yoni of Bhootamrat i.e. the cause. But? Here the word Mahad Brahma is not used for the entire Universal Supreme Soul. This word indicates the latent state of the world i.e. the inanimate nature. Is it bigger than its gross and subtle functional disorders? It is important because it is comprehensive and because it nourishes the self-disorders, it is called Brahma. Thus, on the basis of etymology, nature has been called Mahadbrahma here. For this Mahadbrahma, Apara Prakriti in the earlier chapters? Area? Words like nature etc. were used. From that I conceive that this MahadBrahm form nature itself cannot create independently because it is inert. When is God reflected in the form of pure consciousness? Then it becomes conscious and starts working in creation. The act of conception itself is the manifestation of God in its conscious form. As a result of this, first of all the God who holds the universal mind is manifested, which is called Hiranyagarbha according to Vedanta in this stage and after that innumerable living beings and creation in the form of name comes into existence. We can understand this process of creation in such a way that the origin and development of any creative work happens with the instinct that arises in the mind of the doer. Armed with life force, that instinct becomes powerful and becomes impatient to express itself. As a result, it gets expressed in the form of thoughts and feelings and finally transforms into action. A painter expresses his thoughts through colours, a singer expresses them through music, a craftsman expresses them through stones and a litterateur through words. But when any of these imaginations die, he cannot express his thoughts in action. Like it is the creation of an individual? Similarly, the entire universe should also be understood. All desires? ideas? The organized form of emotions and actions is called nature? Which is controlled by these qualities due to being Satvarajatmogunatmika. This nature has been called Mahadbrahma here? Which is also denoted by the word Maya in Vedanta. The individual form of Maya is called Avidya. The difference between the soul and God is that the soul remains under ignorance? Whereas God keeps Maya under his control. God further says

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The mighty Brahman is a womb for Me; and in That I lay seed; therefrom is the birth of all beings, O descendant of Bharata !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
My womb is the great brahman (i.e. Prakrti). In that I lay the germ. From that, O Arjuna, is the birth of all beings.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
My womb is the great-sustainer. In that I place the seed. From that, O scion of the Bharata dynasty, occurs the birth of all things.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The great Brahman is nature? That is also different from Sri Bhu and Durga. Uma Saraswati and others are other living beings with parts of it. Similarly, the Kashayana scripture says: Sri is the earth, Durga is the great illusion, which is the mother of the world and the bondage of the world. Other living beings, such as Umavaga, are parts of them and are sung in all the Vedas by that Self. My vagina is the vagina for conception? Not the mother? From the rest of the sentence. Thus, in the Sama-vada and the Sharkara-aksha-sruta -- the great illusion for the purpose of holding the womb of Vishnu is devoid of all sufferings. Yet she is with Vishnu, revealing herself to be deluded by suffering. Therefore all the suffering of Sita is a false display And in the Kurma Purana -- and this is not the earth [Br. The unfading legend says that she voluntarily became a maidservant to the great-grandmother of the worlds Even what is said in the Matsya Purana is voluntary. Even by the word Mahad-Brahma, Nature is thus great in Brahman, but there are two, Nature and Mahesvara, there.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
By praising knowledge, he gives the meaning defined for the mind fixed on it, saying, "In the field. It prevents self-being as form -- mine. He reverses the divine power of consciousness -- the Trigunatmika. Even the statistical nature is reversed as mine. By the word 'womb' he argues that all the functions worthy of building are meant to be the counterparts of all beings. It achieves the importance of nature -- all. The word Brahma is in the womb, taking the pervasiveness of all actions. Doubting that there is any difference in the meaning of the great Brahman because of the inequality of gender, he says: The womb. In that, etc., he explains -- in that. Beginning to say that such a union of the field and the knower of the field is the past cause, he doubts whether this has been shown elsewhere, saying, "The field. By the word pregnancy he shows the fruit of the said union -- that it is possible.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Arjun of Bharatvanshodbhava! My original nature is the place of origin and I establish the living womb in it. From him all living beings originate.

Explanation - Mam Yonirmahadbrahma - Here the original nature has been called Mahadbrahma? There can be many reasons for this like - (1) God is free from smallness and bigness, hence He is both the smallest and the greatest - Anoraniyaanmahato mahiyaan (Shwetashvataro Upanishad 3. 20). But from the point of view of the world, the biggest thing is the original nature itself, that is, the most comprehensive element in the world is the original nature itself. Apart from God, there is no more comprehensive element in the world than this. Therefore, this original nature has been called MahadBrahm here. (2) Being in between Mahat (Mahatattva i.e. universal intelligence) and Brahma (God), the original nature has been called MahadBrahm. (3) In the last (second) verse, the words Sarga and Pralaya in the posts 'Sarge'pi nopajayante pralaye na vyathanti cha' can be considered to mean Brahma's day and Brahma's night respectively. Therefore, to prove their meaning Mahasarga (appearance of Brahma) and Mahapralaya (disappearance of Brahma) the word Mahadbrahma has been given here. What does it mean that Jivanmukt great men get separated from this basic nature itself? That is why they are not born even in the Mahasarga and are not distressed even in the Mahapralaya. Being the place of origin of all, this original nature has been called Yoni. Infinite universes are born from this basic nature and are absorbed in it. It is from this basic nature that infinite worldly powers arise. By using the word 'Mam' for this basic nature, God says that this nature is mine. Therefore, I have authority over it also. This nature cannot do anything on its own without my will. Whatever it does? She does everything under my leadership only (Gita 9. 10). I am the Supreme Supreme Supreme Soul, superior to the original nature (MahadBrahm) - to explain this, God has used the words 'Mam MahadBrahm'. Despite being a part of the Supreme Supreme Soul, which is superior to Mahad Brahma, the living being turns away from the Supreme Soul and establishes a relationship with nature. Not only this? It connects the functions of nature with the three gunas and by falling further down, it also connects the functions of the gunas with the body etc. and gets tied. Therefore, Lord Mama says from Mahadbrahma verses that the relationship of the living being is actually with me, the Supreme Soul, which is better than the original nature - Mama Eva Anshah (Gita 15. 7)? Therefore, one should not degrade nature by assuming a relationship with it. Tasmingarbham dadhamyaham - Here the term Garbham refers to the community of living beings along with their karmic sanskars. God does not establish any new womb. The living beings who have been in the flow of birth and death since time immemorial? At the time of Mahapralaya, they get absorbed in nature along with their karmic rituals (Gita 9. 7). When the actions of living beings absorbed in nature mature and become oriented to bear fruit? Then in the beginning of Mahasarga, God again establishes the special relationship of those living beings with nature (which was already there in the causal body form) - this is the establishment by God of the womb in the form of community in the form of nature in the form of nature. Sambhavah Sarvbhutanaam Tato Bhavati Bharat - After God establishes the womb in nature, all the living beings are born, that is, those beings take rebirth by assuming subtle and gross bodies. This creation of living beings in the beginning of Mahasarga is the Visarga (renunciation) of God? It is Adikarma (Gita 8. 3).[Until the soul becomes free? Till then, its connection with the causal body, which is a part of nature, remains intact and in the great cataclysm, it merges into nature along with the causal body.] Relationship - Did we tell about the origin of the entire world in the previous verse? Now in the next verse the origin of individual bodies is described.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
In that great brahman forming my womb, I lay the germ. The non-conscient Prakrti is alluded to in the text 'Earth, water, fire, air, ether, Manas, Buddhi and Ahankara - thus My Prakrti is eightfold' (7.4-5). This Prakrti is designated here by the name 'the great brahman' by reason of its being the cause of modifications like the Mahat, the Ahankara etc. In the Srutis also, here and there, even the Prakrti is designated as brahman, as in:  'He who is all-knowing, all-wise, whose austerity consists of knowledge - from Him are produced this brahman as also food, i.e., the universe of name and form' (Mun. U., 1.1.9) The higher Prakrti, which is the mass of conscient selves, alluded to in the passage, 'Know My higher Prakrti to be distinct from this; it is the life-principle' (7.5). It is here expressed by the term 'Garbha', the source or womb in which all living beings originate. I lay the germ, constituting the mass of conscious beings, in that great brahman, which is non-conscient and forms the womb. From that conjunction between the two Prakrtis, brought about by My will is brought forth the origin of all entities from Brahma down to tuft to grass.

He continues to say:  'I Myself bring about the conjunction of the conscient and unconscient Prakrtis in the manifested state of effect'.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Mama etc. For Me : [For Me]  Who am of  the nature of the inexplicable Supreme Bliss, the mighty Brahman : the Brahman that is identical with My own energy, allowing expansion [of all in It].  Taking hold of just My own energy of Self-consciousness,  I cause the beginningless tiny  [individual]  Souls to pass through the cycle of birth and  death by way of favouring them.			
 Therefore-

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Mama, My own Maya, i.e. Prakrti consisting of the three alities, which belongs to Me; is the yonih, womb [Here Ast. adds 'karanam, cause' (-off all the creatures).-Tr.] for all the creatures. Since it (Prakrti) is great (mahat) as compared with all its effects, and it is the sustainer (brahma) [Prakrti is brahma since it permeates all of its own products.-A.G.] of all its own transformations, therefore the womb itself is alified as mahat brahma. Tasmin, in that, in the womb which is the great-sustainer; aham, I, God, possessed of the power in the form of the two aspects, viz the field and the Knower of the field; dadhami, place, deposit; garbham, the seed-the seed of the birth of Hiranayagarbha, te seed which is the cause of the birth of all things-; i.e., I bring the field into association with the Knower of the field who conforms to the nature of the limiting adjuncts, viz ignorance, desire and activity.
Tatah, from that, from that deposition of the seed; O scion of the Bharata dynasty, bhavati, occurs; sambhavah, the birth, origination; sarva-bhutanam, of all things, following the birth of Hiranyagarbha.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Here, to refute the perception that dull ignorance is called the great Brahman, he says, "The great. Nature is the great Lakshmi. Indeed, is it said that dull nature is Sattva, Rajas and Tamas? If it is said that the same is true here because of its presence? Not even there, since the conscious nature is mentioned? How is it that it is different from the differences of Sattva and others? That is, it is proud of dull nature and proud of its functional being and other qualities, that is, it has three forms. Is it true that Goddess Maheshwari, Brahma, Kaumari, Gaindri, Sri, Bhu and Durga are said to be divided into seven parts in the Agamas? How is that said to be divided into three parts? The first four are others by the Lord. Where are the creatures? How is it that they are said to be forms of it, with parts of it, and with presence of it? Where is this? He says, and so on. Others explain that my womb is the womb that is my form, the cause of the universe, and in the perceived consequence of the assumption that it is my mother, he says, "My wife. The translation of mine indicates that there would be an obstacle to the perceived consequence otherwise. Would it also be perceived as mother by accepting the perceived consequence? How then is it certain that she is a wife? The rest is that this perception applies. Why not? He argues that it is a sentence. By the force of the scriptures, he argues, that it is so. It proceeds to illuminate. On the occasion of the fact that this same scripture has also obtained something else, he says, "Therefore. That which has a false and unrealistic display. From this he argues that it is the same -- so be it. There it was said that the venerable Rama of intense radiance burnt the illusory Sita He showed Sita to Rama, the fire, he is dear to the gods [ ] and so on. Indeed, it has been said that Mahalakshmi, Sri, Bhu and Durga are different. Bhuvaschagourbhutvaasrumukhi khinna [Part.10.1.18] is it perceived as suffering? How is that? He argues that it is not. Isn't this famous earth, which is proud of beings, the form of God? But this is another. Wherefore, he argues, and so on. Bhuranya in the form of Mahalakshmi? Is this famous? His and hers. Shadow statue. Indeed, let it be the abduction of Ravana and other things, but the servitude of Valmiki to the illusory Sita. There is a scripture.because therefore is the rest. Is it said that the great Brahman is nature? There, since he is determined to say the proof, he again acknowledges -- great.great? In a different step, Brahman, then the word paramiti is to be addressed. Wherefore, he argues, it is great. There in the Matsya Purana. In the order of meaning, my womb is the great Brahman, the explanation in reverse. From the context of the example of the Matsya Purana, it is inferred here.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
That is what He turns to the listener with praise and shows the play of His inconceivable power and glory, saying, "My. They are not born even in that creation [14.2], saying that the creation is naturally co-qualified, and says that it is possible, saying, "My womb. It is mine to clarify that the cause of all beings, which is the cause of the modes, is caused by the association of the modes of My nature, as stated above, by Me. The womb, which is a part of Me, is the place of insemination, and nature is the place of insemination. There I place the womb as the seed and the thread as the conscious capital. The consciousness of both forms associated with it is described as many beings who are part of it and who are separate from the consciousness of My form and who are trying to hold life. Then he says, "Then. From the womb all beings are born.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Turning to the listener with praise, he explains this definite meaning of the fact that nature and man, both subject to God, are the cause of the origin of all beings, and not independent, as in the principle of Sāṅkhya, in two ways. Because Brahman is the cause of growth of all actions, is it unmanifest? Nature is the threefold illusion? That great Brahman is the place of conception of the womb of My Lord. I place and hold the resolution in the form of a moment that I shall beget many children in the womb of that great Brahman, the cause of the birth of all beings. That is, I make it the subject of that resolution. For as a father conceives a lying son in the form of oats and other foods, absorbed in him with his body, before injecting semen into the womb, and from that conception that son is conceived with the body, and for that purpose there are conditions such as mud in the middle? Thus, in order to connect the knower of the field, who is absorbed in Me in the annihilation, who is suspicious of ignorance, desire and action, with the enjoyable field at the time of creation, with the aggregate of actions, I conceive in the form of illusory instinct. And for that purpose in the middle are the states of origin of sky, air, light, water, earth, etc. Then the possible origin of all beings, such as Hiranyagarbha, from conception, O Bharatha? not without the conception by God, that is.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
That is why, turning to the listener with praise, he explains this definite meaning of the fact that nature and man, both subject to God, are the cause of the origin of all beings, and not independent, saying, "My. Great because it is inseparable from country and time? Brahman, being the enlarger or the cause of the increase of His own actions. That is, nature. That great Brahman is the place of conception in the womb of my God? In Him I conceive and place the illusion of consciousness for the cause of the expansion of the universe. That is, I unite the knower of the field, who is absorbed in Me at the time of annihilation, who is subject to ignorance, desire and action, with the enjoyable field at the time of creation. Then from conception there is the possible origin of all beings, such as Brahma.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
By praising knowledge, for the mind concentrated on it, he explains the defined meaning that such union with the knower of the field and the field is the cause of beings, saying, "My. My own, not independent illusion, possessed by Me, is the threefold nature, the womb of all beings, the cause. But the teachers have not explained that my vagina is the place of conception because it is easy. It distinguishes the vagina itself. The great Brahman, from the greatness of all actions and from the filling of His own transformations. But the Ācāryas have not explained that Brahman is the great cause of the first action of the Mahat-tattva, that the word Brahman is the cause-form-main meaning, and that the renunciation of the light-being action-bearer is inconsistent with the request that Brahman is great. I place in the womb of that great Brahman the seed, the cause of the birth of the beings of the golden womb and other discharges. I, the self-conscious voice of the two powers of the field and the knower of the field, mean that I connect the knower of the field with the field, who follows the form of the title of knowledge, desire and action. Then from that conception there arises the possible origin of all beings, from the golden womb to the pillar. If, indeed, even if the golden-womb is then possible, how is it possible for all to be then, since their own mothers and fathers and others are seen to be possible? The meaning of the address is that just as even those born of father and others, such as you, are Bharatas by virtue of their descent from Bharata.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
From the consultation of the ancient texts about the two natures of one's own identified by the word 'my womb' and from the harmony of the texts, the word 'garbha' is here beyond the whole of the mind specified by the word other nature. He says for the purpose of seeking -- in that. Indeed, it has been said in the past that this world is sustained [7.5] as the basis of conscious nature and the sustainability of the unconscious. Here, in Tut, the opposite is said, and here he says, "Unconscious. Here it is not said that the purpose of making such a union is to give enjoyment according to action to men subject to action, who are not intended to be the basic object up to the point of subordination to it. Here then is not the next? Because of its slow purpose, it is subsequent, and because of the fruitfulness of the sense of cause. Therefore, with the intention that the same reason mentioned in the previous chapter, from the union of the field and the knower of the field [13.27], is here attributed as independent for the dispelling of the doubt of the Sankhya view, he says, by the union of the two natures. That is why it is also active.Isn't it after the great and the beginning of all beings here? Since the word Bhuta is ascended to Mahada and others, nor is there a definition of Mahabhuta and others? Since the knowers of the field are other than the type of cause of bondage, and since that essence of the knower of the field is created defined by the word 'being', they are situated within the universe up to the pillar of Brahman. The living beings are subject to the world caused by karma [V.Dh.104.23] All the gods, beginning with Brahma, are human beings and animals. Vishnumayamahavartamohandhatamasaavritah [V.Pu.5.30.17]Hiranyagarbha Bhagavan [V.Pu.6.7.56] etc. and with the intention that it is the same as Brahmeshana and others, it is said that all words are up to the pillars of Brahma and others From the words of the creation of the four-faced resolution alone, it is clear that even those created by it, like the womb of gold, up to the pillars, are created by the Supreme Self.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus, by saying that it is the form of fruit, he explains that very thing, saying, "My. The great Brahman, separated from place, time and others, because of its greatness, its enlargement, its cause of the growth of objects for the purpose of play, is the Brahman nature, the womb of My Purushottama, the place of conception in the form of manifestation of various objects for the purpose of play. I put the pregnancy in him with a sense of playfulness. Then, after conception, there is a possible origin of all beings. The address India is for confidence.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Now, what is the nature of beings, and on what basis is it the cause of beings? The vagina is the entry point of my pure consciousness. I, the Self of consciousness, place in the Mahad-Brahma, the Brahman, the expanding cause of the first work of the Mahat-tattva, the unmanifest, the unmanifest, the other synonym, the threefold illusion, in the form of My own reflection. Then the illusion which is conceived in My image, from which the possible origin of all beings, the building dharmas, the great and the golden-womb, etc., arises, O Bharatha. This assertion of the relativity of the image of the mind rejects the statistically accepted independence of nature.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth, and it is that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births of all living beings, O son of Bharata.

 This is an explanation of the world: everything that takes place is due to the combination of kṣetra and kṣetra-jña, the body and the spirit soul. This combination of material nature and the living entity is made possible by the Supreme God Himself. The mahat-tattva is the total cause of the total cosmic manifestation; and that total substance of the material cause, in which there are three modes of nature, is sometimes called Brahman. The Supreme Personality impregnates that total substance, and thus innumerable universes become possible. This total material substance, the mahat-tattva, is described as Brahman in the Vedic literature ( Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.1.19): tasmād etad brahma nāma-rūpam annaṁ ca jāyate. The Supreme Person impregnates that Brahman with the seeds of the living entities. The twenty-four elements, beginning from earth, water, fire and air, are all material energy, and they constitute what is called mahad brahma, or the great Brahman, the material nature. As explained in the Seventh Chapter, beyond this there is another, superior nature – the living entity. Into material nature the superior nature is mixed by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thereafter all living entities are born of this material nature. The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is said that the scorpion is born out of rice. But the rice is not the cause of the scorpion. Actually, the eggs were laid by the mother. Similarly, material nature is not the cause of the birth of the living entities. The seed is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they only seem to come out as products of material nature. Thus every living entity, according to his past activities, has a different body, created by this material nature, so that the entity can enjoy or suffer according to his past deeds. The Lord is the cause of all the manifestations of living entities in this material world.