Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yayā svapnaṃ bhayaṃ śokaṃ viṣādaṃ madameva ca .
na vimuñcati durmedhā dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī

Word Meanings:
यया - by which
स्वप्नम् - sleep
भयम् - fear
शोकम् - grief
विषादम् - despair
मदम् - conceit
एव - indeed
च - and
न - not
विमुञ्चति - abandons
दुर्मेधाः - a stupid man
धृतिः - firmness
सा - that
पार्थ - O Arjuna
तामसी - Tamasic .

Life Application:
Fortitude by which a foolish person does not give up sleep, fear, grief, despondency, arrogance—is Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Partha, that determination by which a foolish person does not give up sleep, fear, grief, despondency and arrogance, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
That, by which a stupid man does not abandon sleep, fear, grief, despair and also conceit  that firmness, O Arjuna, is Tamasic.

यया by which? स्वप्नम् sleep? भयम् fear? शोकम् grief? विषादम् despair? मदम् conceit? एव indeed? च and? न not? विमुञ्चति abandons? दुर्मेधाः a stupid man? धृतिः firmness? सा that? पार्थ O Arjuna? तामसी Tamasic (dark).Commentary The man who is an embodiment of darkness is made up of every possible kind of evil. He is very indolent and sinful. He is inordinately addicted to sleep. He considers these to be only proper. He experiences sorrow on account of his evil actions. As he is very much attached to the body he entertains great fear. He is ever discontented at heart. He is lustful and selfconceited. He does not know how to behave. He is rude and insolent. He indulges much in sensual pleasures.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
And that which clings perversely to false idealism, fear, grief, despair and vanity is the product of Ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Tamasic determination holds fast to: 1) Svapna: sleep or projected imaginations of a lazy mind. 2) Bhaya: imaginary fears of a dark future. 3) Soka, Visada, and Mada: grief over the past, depression regarding the future, and pride/conceit in a corrupt present. A foolish person (durmedha) clings to these negative states, which exhaust their vital energy, and considers them as their natural way of life.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The content, whery a foolish man does not give up his sleep, fear, grief, despondency and also arrogancethat content is deemed to be of the Tamas (Strand).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
That Dhrti by which a foolish person does not give up sleep, fear, grief, depression and passion, O Arjuna, is of the nature of Tamas.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
That firmness is considered [Some editions read partha in place of mata (considered).-Tr.] to be born of tamas due to which a person with a corrupt intellect does not give up sleep, fear, sorrow, despondency as also sensuality.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The Tamasic determination is that of a stupid person (durmedha) who, considering sleep, fear, sorrow, sensory despondency, and arrogance as his natural duties, refuses to abandon them.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Partha, that determination by which a foolish person does not give up sleep, fear, anxiety, grief, and pride, is Tamasic.

Commentary: A Tamasic person is deeply entrenched in laziness and oversleeping. They live in constant fear of disease, death, or loss; remain worried and lamenting over the past; and boast of their self-proclaimed superiority. They also cling to vices like envy, deceit, and malice. Their intellect is so clouded by ignorance that they refuse to change their negative habits, leading to self-destruction.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
That Dhrti by which a foolish person does not give up, i.e. persists in, sleep, and sensuous indulgence through the activities of the mind, vital force etc., - that Dhrti is of the nature of Tamas. The terms fear, grief and depression indicate the objects generating fear, grief etc. That Dhrti by which one maintains the activities of the mind, the vital force etc., as a means for these, is of the nature of Tamas.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
The Tamasic determination is that by which a person fixes his pleasure solely in sleep, disputes, and laziness.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
That firmness is mata, considered to be; tamasi, born of tamas; yaya, due to which; durmedha, a person with a corrupt intellect; na vimuncati, does not give up-indeed, holds fast to; svapnam, sleep; bhayam, fear; sokam, sorrow; visadam, despondency; eva ca, as also; madam, sensuality, enjoyment of objects-mentally holding these as things that must always be resorted to, considering them to be greatly important to himself, like a drunkard thinking of wine.
The threefold division of action as also of agents according to the differences of the gunas has been stated. After that, now is being stated the threefold division of results and happiness:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The determination by which one does not abandon sleep, fear, sorrow, depression, and arrogance, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The fortitude is Tamasic by which an undiscerning person fails to abandon sleep, fear, grief (sorrow over separation from liked objects), despondency, and arrogance (inclination toward unscriptural indulgence).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The fortitude by which a stupid person with a corrupt and undiscerning mind does not give up sleep and other negative states, but repeats them, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The determination by which a foolish person does not give up sleep, fear, sorrow, despondency, and pride, thinking of them as essential to himself like a drunkard clings to wine, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The Tamasic determination locks the mind in sleep, fear, grief, depression, and pride. It represents the state of a corrupt mind that is resistant to any noble change.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The determination by which a foolish person obstinately clings to sleep, fear (forgetfulness of the Lord), sorrow, depression, and ignorance, is Tamasic.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The determination by which a person holds fast to sleep, fear, sorrow, despondency, and arrogance, is Tamasic.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness, lamentation, moroseness and illusion – such unintelligent determination, O son of Pṛthā, is in the mode of darkness.

 It should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does not dream. Here “dream” means too much sleep. Dreaming is always present; either in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, dreaming is a natural occurrence. But those who cannot avoid oversleeping, who cannot avoid the pride of enjoying material objects, who are always dreaming of lording it over the material world, and whose life, mind and senses are thus engaged, are considered to have determination in the mode of ignorance.