Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yasmātkṣaramatīto.ahamakṣarādapi cottamaḥ .
ato.asmi loke vedeca prathitaḥ puruṣottamaḥ

Word Meanings:
यस्मात् - as
क्षरम् - the perishable
अतीतः - transcend
अहम् - I
अक्षरात् - than the imperishable
अपि - also
च - and
उत्तमः - best
अतः - therefore
अस्मि - I am
लोके - in the world
वेदे - in the Vedas
च - and
प्रथितः - declared
पुरुषोत्तमः - the Highest Purusha.

Life Application:
Because God transcends the perishable and excels the imperishable, God is celebrated in world and Veda as Supreme Person.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Because I am transcendental to the perishable (mutable) and even superior to the imperishable (immutable), therefore I am celebrated as Purushottama (the Supreme Person) in the world and also in the Veda.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
As I transcend the perishable and am even higher than the imperishable, I am declared to be the highest Purusha in the world and in the Vedas.

यस्मात् as? क्षरम् the perishable? अतीतः transcend? अहम् I? अक्षरात् than the imperishable? अपि also? च and? उत्तमः best? अतः therefore? अस्मि (I) am? लोके in the world? वेदे in the Vedas? च and? प्रथितः declared? पुरुषोत्तमः the Highest Purusha.Commentary Purushottama is a wellknown name of the Lord. The name is ite appropriate as He is the supreme Purusha.Kshara The perishable -- the tree of Samsara.Akshara The imperishable -- the seed of the tree of Samsara.Because I excel the perishable (the tree of illusory Samsara) and am more excellent also than the imperishable (the seed of the tree of the illusory Samsara) and because I am thus superior to the perishable and the imperishable? I am proclaimed in the world and in the Vedas as the highest Purusha. Devotees know Me as such. Poets also describe Me as such.I am beyond all limitations. There is no trace of dualism in Me. Therefore? I am called by all and by the scriptures the highest Purusha.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Beyond comparison of the Eternal with the non-eternal am I, Who am called by scriptures and sages the Supreme Personality, the Highest God.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
As explained in the discussion of the previous two verses, the one Supreme Self is called 'Kshara' when viewed as the changing world, and 'Akshara' as the changeless knower of that world. It is well known that without a changeless entity, the knowledge of changes is not possible. Therefore, if we are conscious of the modifications of the body, mind, intellect, and the outer world, it proves the existence of this Akshara, which itself remains changeless (kutastha) and illuminates all other thoughts. It also becomes clear that the attribute of being 'Akshara' is ascribed to the Supreme Self only from the standpoint of 'Kshara'; otherwise, in Himself, He is unqualified (nirvishesha). Therefore, the Lord says here: because I transcend both Kshara and Akshara, I am celebrated in the world and in the Veda as 'Purushottama'. That is, being complete, He is 'Purusha', and transcending Kshara and Akshara, He is 'Uttama'; hence, in the Vedas as well as in the world, poets and writers have addressed and referred to Him by the name 'Purushottama'. Now, the Lord proceeds to state the fruit of knowing the Supreme Self:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Becuase, I have transcended the perishing and also the nonperishing, therefore I am acclaimed in the world as well as in the Veda as the Highest of persons.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Because I transcend the perishable Person and am also higher than the imperishable person, therefore I am styled in the Smrti and the Veda as the Supreme Person (Purusotama).

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Since I am transcendental to the mutable and above even the immutable, hence I am well known in the world and in the Vedas as the supreme Person.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains: Moreover, the Lord shows that His status of being beyond the phenomenal world is proved by the fame of His name in both the world and the Veda. Lest it be thought that this name is a conventional term like 'Asvakarna' (a plant) without any specific derivative meaning, or that the Lord's lordship is limited like that of worldly rulers, He says 'tasya' (of that). He presents the reason expected by the word 'yasmat' (since) by stating 'atah' (hence). The remaining part of the sentence is 'uttamah purushah' (the Supreme Person).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Since I transcend the perishable and am superior even to the imperishable, therefore I am celebrated in the world and in the Veda as the Supreme Person (Purushottama).

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that by using the words 'yasmad ksharam atito'ham', the Lord conveys that the perishable (Prakriti) is changing at every moment, while He remains eternally changeless and immutable. Therefore, He is entirely beyond the perishable. The senses are superior to the body; the mind is superior to the senses; the intellect is superior to the mind. Although they are superior to one another, the body, senses, mind, and intellect belong to the same category, i.e., they are sentient-less matter (jada). But the Supreme Reality is completely beyond them because He is not matter, but consciousness. By stating 'aksharad api chottamah', although the individual soul (Akshara), being a fragment of God, has an essential identity with Him, the Lord declares Himself to be superior even to the individual soul. The reasons are: (1) despite being a part of God, the soul identifies itself with the perishable Prakriti and is deluded by its qualities, whereas the Lord is never deluded; (2) the Lord comes into the world by dominating His Prakriti, whereas the soul comes under the sway of Prakriti; (3) the Lord is always unattached, whereas the soul has to make efforts to become unattached. Declaring Himself beyond Kshara and superior to Akshara also shows the difference between Kshara and Akshara. The word 'loke' refers to Puranas, Smritis, and other scriptures where the Lord is famous as Purushottama. The Veda is the pure eternal knowledge which manifested as Rik, Yajur, etc. In the Vedas too, He is famous as Purushottama. The Lord reveals that the Supreme Person mentioned in the previous verse is Himself. The soul's identification with the perishable body is its greatest error, which can be resolved by employing all perishable objects in the service of the world.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Inasmuch as I transcend the perishable (i.e., bound) Person of the aforesaid nature, and I am higher, for reasons stated earlier, than the imperishable Person or liberated self, therefore I am styled the Supreme Person in the Smrti and Srutis. The Smrti is called Loka by reason of its leading to the meaning of the Vedas. The meaning is that I am famous in the Srutis and in the Smrti. In the Sruti for instance; 'Reaching the Supreme Light, it appears in its own nature. He is the Supreme Person' (Cha. U., 8.12.3). In the Smrti we have texts like 'I will approach Him (Sri Krsna), the Supreme Person who is the incarnation of a portion of Visnu, who is without beginning, middle or end' (V. P., 5.17.33).

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Dvav imau etc. upto Purusottamah.  What has been stated in the passage  'There are two persons in the world etc.', is this :  The body organism is made of the earth and other elements.  In the world every person, unitelligent by nature, takes the body for the Self and [hence]  views the Soul to be of perishing nature.  Hence, the sense of duality does not come to an end with regard to the worldly persons, because of  their delusion.  But I am (the I-consciousness is)  the One favouring all, and by cutting the daulity-knot I am to be realised as the One pervading all.
 
(I) have transcended the perishing :   Since the elements are insentient.  (I)  have transcended the nonperishing :  Since the omnipresence  [of the Self] is cut off (not comprehended) when the Self is not properly realised.  In the world and in the Veda too I am acclaimed as the Highest of  Persons :  The Self same Supreme Self, admitting no duality, is described in this manner with the sentences  'He is he Highest Person'  and the like.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yasmat, since; aham, I; am atitah, transcendental; ksaram, to the mutable-I am beyond the Tree of Maya, called the Peepul Tree, which this worldly existence is; and uttamah, above, most excellent or the highest; as compared with api, even; the akasarat, immutable, which is the seed of the Tree of worldly existence; atah, hence, by virtue of being the most excellent as compared with the mutable and the immutable; aham, I; am prathitah, well known; loke, in the world; and vede, in the Vedas; as purusottamah, the supreme Person. Devoted persons know Me thus, and poets also use this name 'Purusottama' in their poetry etc.; they extol Me with this name.
Thereafter, now is stated this result attained by one who knows the Self as described:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains: The Lord Himself defines His status as Purushottama through this etymology. Since He transcends the perishable and is superior even to the imperishable, He is celebrated in the world and in the Veda as Purushottama, meaning He is superior to both the perishable and imperishable Purushas. This is supported by the Vedic text 'The knower of Brahman reaches the Supreme' and by His observed greatness in the world. Therefore, the conclusion is that He alone is the embodiment of Existence, Consciousness, and Bliss, though perceived otherwise due to Maya.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains: The Lord now reveals Himself as the Supreme Lord by explaining the etymology of the famous name 'Purushottama', which distinguishes Him from both the mutable and immutable aspects of existence. This confirms His previously stated glory: 'I am the basis of Brahman' and 'That is My supreme abode'. 'Yasmat ksharam atito'ham': Since He, the Supreme Lord, transcends the perishable kshara, which is the effect, the illusory Peepul tree of worldly existence; and is also superior to the imperishable akshara, the unmanifested Maya which is the cause and seed of the tree of worldly existence. Therefore, being superior to both these adjuncts which are designated as 'Purusha' due to superimposition, He is celebrated in the world and in the Veda as 'Purushottama'. The Veda declares 'He is the Supreme Person', and in the literature of poets He is famous as 'Hari alone is remembered as the Supreme Person'.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains: The Lord demonstrates His status of being the Supreme Person (Purushottama) through the etymology of His name. Since He transcends the perishable (the group of insentient matter) due to His being eternally liberated, and is superior even to the imperishable (the group of sentient beings/souls) due to His being their ruler; therefore, He is celebrated in the world and in the Veda as 'Purushottama'. Thus the Upanishad also says: 'He is indeed the self of all, the controller of all, the lord of all, and He rules over all this'.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanapati explains: The Lord shows that the etymological meaning of His name Purushottama is meaningful. Since He transcends the perishable worldly existence represented by the illusory Peepul tree, and is superior even to its seed represented by Maya (the imperishable); therefore, due to being superior to both Kshara and Akshara, He is well known in the world (among poets) and in the Veda as 'Purushottama'. Devotees know Him as such and poets use this name in their poetry.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains: The distinctness declared in the previous verse is established by this famous name which has its roots in both scripture and tradition. The Lord uses the words 'yasmad...' to explain the derivation of the name Purushottama. Transcending the perishable means He is untouched by its nature. Here 'kshara' refers to the bound souls, and 'akshara' refers to the liberated souls. He is superior to both of them. The word 'loke' here refers to Smriti (sacred tradition) because Smriti explains the meaning of the Vedas. Thus, He is famous in both Veda and Smriti. For instance, the Upanishad states 'Reaching the Supreme Light, it appears in its own nature. He is the Supreme Person', and Smriti states 'the incarnation of a portion of Visnu, who is the Supreme Person'. He discusses the grammatical details of the word 'Purushottama' as a compound (samasa) and shows that it is validly formed under grammatical rules.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains: The Lord declares that He Himself is the Supreme Person (Purushottama). Since He transcends the perishable body organism and its attributes, and is superior even to the imperishable changeless consciousness (Akshara); therefore, in the world (the fourteen worlds) and in the Veda, and also in the Sutras and Smritis, He is celebrated and well known as 'Purushottama'.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains: Since the Lord transcends both limiting adjuncts—the perishable effect and the imperishable cause—He is superior to both. The perishable adjunct is matter (body, etc.), and the soul (Jiva) is superior to it due to being conscious. Superior to the soul is the unmanifest Maya, and superior even to that is the unconditioned Reality. Thus, He is the Supreme Person.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas as that Supreme Person.

 No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa – neither the conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is therefore the greatest of personalities. Now it is clear here that the living entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are individuals. The difference is that the living entities, either in the conditioned state or in the liberated state, cannot surpass in quantity the inconceivable potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities as being on the same level or equal in all respects. There is always the question of superiority and inferiority between their personalities. The word uttama is very significant. No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The word loke signifies “in the pauruṣa āgama (the smṛti scriptures).” As confirmed in the Nirukti dictionary, lokyate vedārtho ’nena: “The purpose of the Vedas is explained by the smṛti scriptures.” The Supreme Lord, in His localized aspect of Paramātmā, is also described in the Vedas themselves. The following verse appears in the Vedas ( Chāndogya Upaniṣad 8.12.3): tāvad eṣa samprasādo ’smāc charīrāt samutthāya paraṁ jyoti-rūpaṁ sampadya svena rūpeṇābhiniṣpadyate sa uttamaḥ puruṣaḥ. “The Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal brahma-jyotir; then in His form He remains in His spiritual identity. That Supreme is called the Supreme Personality.” This means that the Supreme Personality is exhibiting and diffusing His spiritual effulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That Supreme Personality also has a localized aspect as Paramātmā. By incarnating Himself as the son of Satyavatī and Parāśara, He explains the Vedic knowledge as Vyāsadeva.