Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sarvaguhyatamaṃ bhūyaḥ śṛṇu me paramaṃ vacaḥ .
iṣṭo.asi me dṛḍhamiti tato vakṣyāmi te hitam

Word Meanings:
सर्वगुह्यतमम् - the most secret of all
भूयः - again
श्रृणु - hear
मे - My
परमम् - supreme
वचः - word
इष्टः - beloved
असि - art
मे - of Me
दृढम् - dearly
इति - thus
ततः - therefore
वक्ष्यामि - will speak
ते - thy
हितम् - what is good.

Life Application:
Hear again My supreme word, most secret of all; because you are dearly beloved of Me, I will speak for your good.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Hear again My supreme word, most secret of all; because you are dearly beloved of Me, therefore I will speak what is good for you.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Hear thou again My supreme word, most secret of all; because thou art dearly beloved of Me, I will tell thee what is good.

सर्वगुह्यतमम् the most secret of all? भूयः again? श्रृणु hear? मे My? परमम् supreme? वचः word? इष्टः beloved? असि (thou) art? मे of Me? दृढम् dearly? इति thus? ततः therefore? वक्ष्यामि (I) will speak? ते thy? हितम् what is good.Commentary Now listen once more with rapt attention to My words. Thou art very dear to Me. Thou art a sincere aspirant. Therefore I am telling thee this most mysterious truth. Hear from Me this mystery of all mysteries. I shall tell it to you again to make a deep impression on your mind? although it has been declared more than once. I do not hope to get any reward from thee. Thou art My most beloved friend and disciple. Therefore I will speak what is good for thee? the means of attaining Selfrealisation. This is the supreme good or the highest of all kinds of good for thee.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Only listen once more to My last word, the deepest secret of all; thou art My beloved, thou are My friend, and I speak for thy welfare.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Probably when the Lord saw that Arjuna was still unable to make a firm decision, out of affection He promises to repeat the main principle of His teaching. The main reason for this repetition is only friend-love and the desire for Arjuna's welfare. What is that most secret teaching? It is explained in the next verse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Yet again, you must listen to My ultimate (or supreme) message which is the highest secret of all.  You are My dear one and have a firm intellect.  Hence I shall tell you what is good to you :

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Hear again My supreme word, the most secret of all; as you are exceedingly loved by Me, I am telling what is good for you.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Listen again to My highest utterance which is the profoundest of all. Since you are ever dear to Me, therefore I shall speak what is beneficial to you.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Hear again My supreme word, which is the most secret of all secrets. Since you are extremely dear to Me, I shall speak what is for your benefit.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Listen again to My supreme word, the most secret of all. Because you are dearly beloved to Me, I will speak what is good for you.

Commentary: Out of intense love and compassion for Arjuna, who might find it difficult to analyze the entire scripture in a state of distress, the Lord decides to summarize the absolute secret of the Gita. He calls it 'most secret of all' (sarva-guhyatama) because it represents the highest confidential knowledge of loving devotional service. The Lord declares that this revelation is prompted solely by His deep affection for Arjuna ('you are dearly beloved to Me'), as the Supreme Lord always reveals His deepest secrets to His loving devotees for their ultimate welfare.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
It has been said that Bhakti Yoga is the most secret of all secrets, in such texts as 'I will declare to you, who does not cavil, this most mysterious knowledge' (9.1). Hear again My supreme word concerning it (i.e., Bhakti Yoga). As you are exceedingly dear to Me, therefore, I shall declare what is good for you.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.64–18.65 jointly): Sarva - etc.  Manmanah etc, By the portion  'Be with your mind fixed in Me' etc., it is determined that in the scriptures the importance completely lies only in dedicating [everything] to the Brahman; and it is declared that this present scripture  (the Holy Bhagavatgita) is of use [only] in the case of  one who cultivates [the attitude of]  dedication to the Brahman.  			
 Also He says -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Srnu, listen; bhuyah, again; to me, My; paramam, highest; vacah, utternace; which is sarva-guhyatamam, profundest of all, most secret of all secrets, though it has been repeatedly stated. Neither from fear nor even for the sake of money am I speaking! What then? Iti, since, considering that; asi, you are; drdham, ever, unwaveringly; istah, dear; me, to Me; tatah, therefore, for that reason; vaksyami, I shall speak; what is hitam, beneficial; te, to you, what is the highest means of attaining Knowledge. That is indeed the most beneficial of all beneficial things.
'What is that (You are going to tell me)?' In answer the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Because the entire scripture is difficult to understand completely, the Lord Himself, out of supreme compassion, instructs Arjuna about His own essential truth: 'sarva-guhyatama...'. The word 'bhūyaḥ' (again) is used to remove the doubt that the indwelling Lord is someone else; Krishna Himself is the Supreme Lord. The rest is clear.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Since the suffering of life cannot be removed without fully contemplating the profound Gita scripture, the Lord, out of compassion, summarizes its essence Himself: 'sarva-guhyatama...'. Earlier, wisdom (Jnana) was described as more secret than Karma-yoga. Now, this supreme word, which is the secret of all secrets (even superior to Karma-yoga and the resulting Jnana-yoga), is spoken by My grace. Listen to it. I do not speak for any gain, worship, or fame, but because you are extremely dear to Me. Therefore, I will tell you this highest beneficial truth.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Out of compassion for one who is unable to fully contemplate the profound Gita scripture, the Lord Himself summarizes its essence in three verses: 'sarva-guhyatama...'. Listen to My supreme word, which is the most secret of all secrets, spoken again for your benefit. The reason for repeating it again and again is that I consider you to be My very dear friend. Therefore, I will tell you this beneficial truth.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Out of compassion for the one who cannot comprehend the Gita scripture by evaluating the connection between the preceding and succeeding verses, the Lord Vasudeva summarizes the essence Himself. Listen again to My supreme word, which is the most secret of all. The reason for telling this to you is not fear or material gain, but because you are unconditionally and extremely dear to Me. Therefore, I will speak this highest truth which is the means to attain knowledge and the greatest of all beneficial things.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Concluding the entire scripture, the Lord summarizes the essence of Bhakti-yoga, which is the most confidential of all (sarva-guhyatama), in two verses. The repetition of the verse 'man-manā bhava' serves to show that this is the ultimate purpose of the scripture. The supreme nature of this word is because there is no higher path than this. The statement 'you are dearly beloved to Me' indicates that the Lord is revealing this secret out of His intense love for Arjuna, just as He described the characteristics of a wise devotee earlier.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Out of compassion for Arjuna, who was grieving and unable to make a firm decision even after reflecting on the Lord's words, and to uplift the entire world through him, the Lord declares the final conclusion Himself: 'sarva-guhyatama...'. Listen to My supreme word, which is the most confidential essence of all scriptures, like the seed of a sacred mantra. I speak this to you because you are unconditionally and extremely dear to Me. By reflecting on this, your intellect will align with My command.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Although the Lord gave permission to 'do as you wish', out of supreme affection, He intends to summarize the entire scripture in two verses. To ensure Arjuna's complete concentration, He says: 'sarva-guhyatama...'. Listen to My supreme word, which is the most confidential of all secrets, pertaining to the supreme reality. I do not speak out of greed or fear, but because you are unconditionally and extremely dear to Me. Therefore, I will tell you this highest beneficial truth.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me, for it is for your benefit.

 The Lord has given Arjuna knowledge that is confidential (knowledge of Brahman) and still more confidential (knowledge of the Supersoul within everyone’s heart), and now He is giving the most confidential part of knowledge: just surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the end of the Ninth Chapter He has said, man-manāḥ: “Just always think of Me.” The same instruction is repeated here to stress the essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gītā . This essence is not understood by a common man, but by one who is actually very dear to Kṛṣṇa, a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. This is the most important instruction in all Vedic literature. What Kṛṣṇa is saying in this connection is the most essential part of knowledge, and it should be carried out not only by Arjuna but by all living entities.