Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
vyāsaprasādācchrutavānetadguhyamahaṃ param .
yogaṃ yogeśvarātkṛṣṇātsākṣātkathayataḥ svayam

Word Meanings:
व्यासप्रसादात् - by the grace of Vyasa
श्रुतवान् - have heard
एतत् - this
गुह्यम् - secret
अहम् - I
परम् - supreme
योगम् - Yoga
योगेश्वरात् - from the Lord of Yoga (Krishna)
कृष्णात् - from Krishna
साक्षात् - directly
कथयतः - declaring
स्वयम् - Himself.

Life Application:
By grace of Vyasa I heard this supreme secret yoga directly from Krishna, Lord of Yoga Himself speaking.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Through the grace of Vyasa, I have heard this supreme and most secret Yoga, directly from Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, Himself declaring it.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Through the grace of Vyasa I have heard this supreme and most secret Yoga direct from Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, Himself declaring it.

व्यासप्रसादात् through the grace of Vyasa? श्रुतवान् have heard? एतत् this? गुह्यम् secret? अहम् I? परम् supreme? योगम् Yoga? योगेश्वरात् from the Lord of Yoga? कृष्णात् from Krishna? साक्षात् directly? कथयतः declaring? स्वयम् Himself.Commentary Through the grace of Vyasa By obtaining the divine eye from him.Yoga This dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna? I have heard it direct from Him. This dialogue is called Yoga because it treats of Yoga and it leads to the attainment of union with the Lord.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Through the blessing of the sage Vyasa, I listened to this secret and noble science from the lips of its Master, the Lord Shri Krishna.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Before the start of the Mahabharata war, Sage Vyasa had offered the boon of divine vision to Dhritarashtra. But Dhritarashtra lacked the courage to accept it. Hence, at Dhritarashtra's request, Sanjaya was granted this divine vision to narrate the events of the war. Thus, Sanjaya was able to see the entire battlefield and hear the dialogues there. Through this grace of Vyasa, Sanjaya heard this supreme, secret Yoga directly from Lord Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, Himself declaring it. By calling Krishna the 'Lord of Yoga' (Yogeshvara), Sanjaya reminds the blind king that the charioteer of Arjuna is the omnipotent Divine. He warns Dhritarashtra that although the Kaurava army is larger and well-equipped, its destruction is inevitable, because they have to face the Infinite Lord Himself on the opposite side. Sanjaya continues in the next verse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Through the grace of Vyasa, I have heard this highly secret supreme Yoga from Krsna, the Lord of the Yogins, while He was Himself imparting it personally.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
By the grace of Vyasa have I heard this supreme mystery of Yoga as declared in person by Krsna, the Lord of Yoga.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Through the favour of Vyasa I heard this secret concerning the supreme Yoga from Krsna, the Lord of yogas, while He Himself was actually speaking!

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Through the grace of Vyasa, I have heard this supreme and most secret Yoga, directly from Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, Himself declaring it. The power of the sage's blessing enabled Sanjaya to perceive the divine transmission.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Through the grace of Vyasa, I have heard this supreme and most secret Yoga, directly from Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, Himself declaring it. Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains Sanjaya's gratitude and the greatness of the teaching: 1. Through the grace of Vyasa (vyāsaprasādāt): Vyasa gave Sanjaya the divine vision and hearing. Sanjaya acknowledges that without Vyasa's grace, he could never have heard this dialogue from a distance. 2. Supreme and secret Yoga (etadguhyamahaṃ param): The teaching of the Gita is the highest yoga, which is usually extremely confidential. 3. Directly from Krishna, the Lord of Yoga (yogeśvarātkṛṣṇāt... sākṣāt): Hearing it not from a disciple or tradition, but directly from the Lord of Yoga Himself, Krishna, makes it absolutely authentic and spiritually powerful.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
By the grace of Vyasa i.e., by the benefit of the divine sense of perception, granted by him, I have heard this supreme mystery called Yoga from Sri Krsna himself - Sri Krsna who is the treasure-house of knowledge, strength, sovereignty, valour, power and brilliance.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.74–18.78 jointly): Ityaham etc. upto matir mama While concluding the [Krsna-Arjuna]  dialogue with Sanjaya's speech, the [sage Vyasa] teaches this :  What leads to the Absolute Brahman is nothing but the recollection of the purport of the dialoguea recollection that is led finally to the status of the highly vivid, direct cognition admitting no differentiation  [between its subject and object],  resulting from the continuity helped by the series of incessant contemplations [on the purport of the dialogue] according to the method of firmly fixing.  Thus, only through the recollection of the dialogue of the Bhagavat and Arjuna, the Reality could be reached and due to that come fortunes, voctories and prosperity.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
And vyasa-prasadat, through the favour of Vyasa, by having received divine vision from him; aham, I; srutvan, heard; etat [The Commentator uses etam in the masculine gender, in place of etat in the text, because it refers to the masculine word samvada.] (should rather be etam), this; guhyam, secret dialogue, such as it is; concerning the param, supreme; Yogam, Yoga-or, this dialogue itself is the Yoga because it is meant for it-; krsnat, from Krsna; yogeswarat, from the Lord of yogas; kathayatah, while He was speaking; svayam, Himself; saksat, actually; not indirectly through others.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
To the question: 'How did you hear this dialogue?', Sanjaya answers: 'vyasaprasadat...'. A divine ear and eye were given to me by Vyasa, just as the Lord gave to Arjuna. The supreme status of this dialogue is due to its being directly from the Lord's mouth.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sanjaya explains his ability to hear the distant dialogue: 'vyasaprasadat...'. By the grace of Vyasa, who granted him divine senses, he heard this supreme and secret Yoga directly from the Lord of Yoga, Krishna, speaking in His supreme form, rather than through secondary tradition.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sanjaya explains his capability: 'vyasaprasadat...'. Lord Vyasa gave me divine eyes and ears, by whose grace I heard this supreme Yoga directly from Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, Himself declaring it.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
To the question: 'How did you hear it from a distance?', Sanjaya replies: 'vyasaprasadat...'. By the grace of Vyasa, I obtained divine senses. I heard this supreme secret dialogue directly from Krishna, the Lord of Yoga. By calling Him 'Yogeshvara', Sanjaya suggests that the ability to hear it from afar is actually due to the Lord's power, not Sanjaya's own.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Since Dhritarashtra lacked the grace that clears the delusion, Sanjaya emphasizes that he heard this through Vyasa's grace. The grace consisted in obtaining divine eyes and ears to see the universal form (Vishvarupa) and hear distant talks. The dialogue is supreme because it was spoken directly by the Lord Himself, not through intermediaries.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sanjaya narrates this dialogue to show that although Dhritarashtra is full of envy and will not reap the benefits of this wisdom, Sanjaya himself is filled with ecstasy. He calls it wonderful and hair-raising because of the spiritual joy it generated in his heart.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The teaching is completed. Continuing the narrative, Sanjaya says: 'ityaham...'. The dialogue is wonderful because it causes amazement, and hair-raising because it generates a physical thrill out of spiritual delight.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
By the mercy of Vyāsa, I have heard these most confidential talks directly from the master of all mysticism, Kṛṣṇa, who was speaking personally to Arjuna.

 Vyāsa was the spiritual master of Sañjaya, and Sañjaya admits that it was by Vyāsa’s mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This means that one has to understand Kṛṣṇa not directly but through the medium of the spiritual master. The spiritual master is the transparent medium, although it is true that the experience is still direct. This is the mystery of the disciplic succession. When the spiritual master is bona fide, then one can hear Bhagavad-gītā directly, as Arjuna heard it. There are many mystics and yogīs all over the world, but Kṛṣṇa is the master of all yoga systems. Kṛṣṇa’s instruction is explicitly stated in Bhagavad-gītā – surrender unto Kṛṣṇa. One who does so is the topmost yogī. This is confirmed in the last verse of the Sixth Chapter. Yoginām api sarveṣām. Nārada is the direct disciple of Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master of Vyāsa. Therefore Vyāsa is as bona fide as Arjuna because he comes in the disciplic succession, and Sañjaya is the direct disciple of Vyāsa. Therefore by the grace of Vyāsa, Sañjaya’s senses were purified, and he could see and hear Kṛṣṇa directly. One who directly hears Kṛṣṇa can understand this confidential knowledge. If one does not come to the disciplic succession, he cannot hear Kṛṣṇa; therefore his knowledge is always imperfect, at least as far as understanding Bhagavad-gītā is concerned. In Bhagavad-gītā , all the yoga systems – karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga and bhakti-yoga – are explained. Kṛṣṇa is the master of all such mysticism. It is to be understood, however, that as Arjuna was fortunate enough to understand Kṛṣṇa directly, so, by the grace of Vyāsa, Sañjaya was also able to hear Kṛṣṇa directly. Actually there is no difference between hearing directly from Kṛṣṇa and hearing directly from Kṛṣṇa via a bona fide spiritual master like Vyāsa. The spiritual master is the representative of Vyāsadeva also. Therefore, according to the Vedic system, on the birthday of the spiritual master the disciples conduct the ceremony called Vyāsa-pūjā.