Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
dvau bhūtasargau loke.asmindaiva āsura eva ca .
daivo vistaraśaḥ prokta āsuraṃ pārtha me śṛṇu

Word Meanings:
द्वौ - two
भूतसर्गौ - types of beings
लोके - in world
अस्मिन् - this
दैवः - the divine
आसुरः - demonical
एव - even
च - and
दैवः - the divine
विस्तरशः - at length
प्रोक्तः - has been described
आसुरम् - demoniac
पार्थ - O Partha
मे - from Me
श्रृणु - hear.

Life Application:
Two types of beings exist in this world: divine and demonic; divine has been described, hear now of demonic.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
There are two types of beings in this world, the divine and the demoniacal; the divine has been described at length; hear from Me, O Partha, of the demoniacal.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
There are two types of beings in this world, the divine and the demoniacal; the divine has been described at length; hear from Me, O Arjuna, of the demoniacal.

द्वौ two? भूतसर्गौ types of beings? लोके in world? अस्मिन् (in) this? दैवः the divine? आसुरः demonical? एव even? च and? दैवः the divine? विस्तरशः at length? प्रोक्तः has been described? आसुरम् demoniacal? पार्थ O Partha? मे from Me? श्रृणु hear.Commentary The two divisions of created beings? the one divine and the other satanic? carry on their respective activities in accordance with their natural tendencies or traits.In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad also you will find Verily there are two classes of the Creators creatures -- gods and demons (I.3.1).Bhutasargau Creations of beings? types or classes of creatues. Creation here means what is created. The men who are created with the two kinds of nature? the divine and the demonical? are here mentioned as the two creations. Every man in this world comes under the one or the other of the two creations? the divine and the demoniacal.Lord Krishna says to Arjuna? I will now describe to thee the characteristics of those men who are endowed with the devilish alities. If you have an understanding of the demoniacal alities? you will avoid them. The demoniacal nature is described in detail to the very end of this discourse.There is some reference in chapter IX? verses 9? 11 and 12? to the demoniacal nature but as the description is incomplete it is completed in this discourse.The divine nature has been declared in detail by the blessed Lord in the previous chapters -- the state of a Sthitaprajna in chapter II? the state of a Bhagavata in chapter XII and the state of a Trigunatita in chapter XIV and in the first three verses of this discourse.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
All beings are of two classes: Godly and godless. The Godly I have described; I will now describe the other.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
There are two types of beings in this world, the divine and the demoniacal; the divine has been described at length; hear from Me, O Partha, of the demoniacal.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that while there are other categories like fiendish (rakshasi) natures, the scriptures only teach those who can be reformed (divine and demoniacal). Human tendencies can be directed towards the divine or the demoniacal; evil is only a distorted expression of the same mental energy. In ancient scriptures, moral values are usually praised, but the detail of vices is rarely described. Modern psychology confirms that recognizing one's vices is the first step to curing them. By studying the characteristics of the demoniacal nature, a seeker can purify their mind and direct their energies toward Self-realization.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
There are two types of  creations of beings in this world  [viz.]  the divine and also the demoniac.  The divine one has been properly described in detail; hear [now] the demoniac one from Me, O son of Prtha !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
There are two types of beings in this world - the divine and the demoniac. The divine has been described at length. Hear from Me, O Arjuna, about the demoniac.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
In this world there are are two (kinds of) creation of beings: the divine and the demoniacal. The divine has been spoken of elaborately. Hear about the demoniacal from Me, O son of Prtha.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that the fiendish (rakshasi) nature is included under the demoniac (asuri) nature. Every human being can be classified under either the divine or the demoniac nature depending on their dominant tendencies.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
There are two creations of beings in this world—the divine and the demoniac. The divine has been described in detail; now hear from Me, O Partha, of the demoniac at length.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that human nature contains both the divine (spirit) and the material (nature). When the consciousness associates with temporary matter, it turns demoniac (Asura). When it turns to the Supreme, the divine (Deva) qualities manifest. Although animals and other species also exhibit traits of both natures, only humans have the free will and intellect to completely abandon the demoniac and cultivate the divine. The Lord describes the demoniac qualities in detail so that seekers can introspect, recognize these traits in themselves, and consciously eliminate them.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
In this world of works, there are 'two tpyes' of created beings who perform actions, viz., the divine and demoniac. Creation is production. By the force of old Karma of the nature of good and evil deeds, beings are born, divided into two kinds at their very birth for working out the ?ndments of the Lord or act contrary to them. Such is the meaning. Of these, the divine destiny has been told at length. For the purpose of working out their destiny in accordance with the mode of conduct, the creation of the godly, viz., of those devoted to My ?ndments, occurs; that mode of condut, composed of Karma-jnana-and-Bhakti-Yogas has been described at length. To follow what conducts leads to the creation of demons - listen about that conduct.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Dvau etc.  This divine wealth has been described  [by the passage]  'Fearlessness' etc.										
 Now the demoniac [wealth],  He describes :

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Dvau, two, in number; are the (kinds of) bhuta-sargau, creation of beings, of men. Sarga is derived from srj in the sense of that which is created. The persons themselves, who are created with the natures of gods and demons, are being spoken of as 'two creations of beings', which accords with the Upanisadic text, 'There were two classes of Prajapati's sons, the gods and the demons' (Br. 1.3.1). For, asmin, in this; loke, world, all (persons) can rationally be divided into two classes. Which are those two creations of beings? The answer is, the two are the daiva, divine; eva ca, and; the asura, the demoniacal which are being discussed.
The Lord speaks of the need of restating the two that have been already referred to: Daivah, the divine creation of beings; proktah, has been spoken of; vistarasah, elaborately-in, 'Fearlessness, purity of mind,' etc. (1-3). But the demoniacal has not been spoken of in extenso. Hence, O son of Prtha, srnu, hear of, understand; the asuram, demoniacal; me, from Me, from My speech which is being uttered in detail, so that this may be avoided.
Upto the end of the chapter the demoniacal nature is being presented as the alities of creatures; for, when this is directly perceived, it becomes possible to eschew it:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that 'bhuta-sargau' means the two types of creations of human beings. A human becomes a Deva (divine) by subduing desires through scriptural wisdom, and an Asura (demoniac) by giving in to uncontrolled desires.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that the divine nature has been elaborately discussed under स्थितप्रज्ञ, भक्त, and गुणातीत in previous chapters. Now the demoniac nature is described to help seekers recognize and abandon it.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that in this world, all humans are divided into divine and demoniac types. The divine nature has been explained; now listen to the demoniac nature to avoid falling into it.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that beings are born as divine or demoniac based on their past good or evil deeds. The godly follow the Lord's commands, while the demoniac rebel against them.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that only humans have the intelligence to choose between the divine path of liberation and the demoniac path of bondage.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that the description of demoniac qualities is meant to serve as a mirror for seekers to examine their own hearts and remove any traces of Asuri tendencies.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O son of Pṛthā, in this world there are two kinds of created beings. One is called divine and the other demoniac. I have already explained to you at length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of the demoniac.

 Lord Kṛṣṇa, having assured Arjuna that he was born with the divine qualities, is now describing the demoniac way. The conditioned living entities are divided into two classes in this world. Those who are born with divine qualities follow a regulated life; that is to say they abide by the injunctions in scriptures and by the authorities. One should perform duties in the light of authoritative scripture. This mentality is called divine. One who does not follow the regulative principles as they are laid down in the scriptures and who acts according to his whims is called demoniac or asuric. There is no other criterion but obedience to the regulative principles of scriptures. It is mentioned in Vedic literature that both the demigods and the demons are born of the Prajāpati; the only difference is that one class obeys the Vedic injunctions and the other does not.