Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
manyase yadi tacchakyaṃ mayā draṣṭumiti prabho .
yogeśvara tato me tvaṃ darśayātmānamavyayam

Word Meanings:
मन्यसे - Thou thinkest
यदि - if
तत् - that
शक्यम् - possible
मया - by me
द्रष्टुम् - to see
इति - thus
प्रभो - O Lord
योगेश्वर - O Lord of Yogins
ततः - then
मे - to me
त्वम् - Thou
दर्शय - show
आत्मानम् - Self
अव्ययम् - imperishable.

Life Application:
Ask with humility to behold divine glory, acknowledging that spiritual visions are granted through divine grace.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Lord! If You think it is possible for me to see that form of Yours, then, O Lord of Yoga, show me Your imperishable form.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
If Thou, O Lord, thinkest it possible for me to see it, do Thou, then, O Lord of the Yogins, show me Thy imperishable Self.

मन्यसे Thou thinkest? यदि if? तत् that? शक्यम् possible? मया by me? द्रष्टुम् to see? इति thus? प्रभो O Lord? योगेश्वर O Lord of Yogins? ततः then? मे me? त्वम् Thou? दर्शय show? आत्मानम् (Thy) Self? अव्ययम् imperishable.Commentary Arjuna is very keen and eager to see the Cosmic Form of the Lord. He prays to Him to grant him the vision. This supreme vision can be obtained only through His grace.Yogesvara also means the Lord of Yoga. A Yogi is one who is endowed with the eight psychic powers (Siddhis). The Lord of the Yogins is Yogesvara. And? Yoga is identity of the individual soul with the Absolute. He who is able to bestow this realisation of identity on the deserving spiritual aspirant is Yogesvara.He Who is able to create? preserve? destroy? veil and graciously release is the Lord. (These five actions? Panchakriyas? are known respectively as Srishti? Sthiti? Samhara? Tirodhana and Anugraha.)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
If Thou thinkest that it can be made possible for me to see it, show me, O Lord of Lords, Thine own Eternal Self.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The desire expressed in the previous verse is repeated here with complete humility and respect. Even in our normal practical life, we use such language when making a respectful prayer or a humble request; such as, 'if I may be permitted to say something', 'it would be a great favour to me', 'I have the privilege to present', etc. The Pandava prince Arjuna, as if as a result of reconsideration, giving up his previously used military language, requests with humility, 'If You consider me worthy, then show me Your imperishable form.'

The humility and respect shown here is not a display of false emotions to fulfill some low-level desire. This becomes clear from the adjectives addressed to the Lord. In the first line, Arjuna addresses the Lord as 'Prabho' and then by the name 'Yogesvara'. This indicates that Arjuna was now beginning to believe that Shri Krishna was not just a human being who was only capable of giving intellectual satisfaction or spiritual discourse to his disciple. He has understood that Shri Krishna is Himself the Lord, i.e., the Supreme Soul and the Lord of Yoga (Yogesvara). Therefore, if He thinks that His disciple Arjuna would benefit from the vision of the Cosmic Form, then He is fully capable of fulfilling his desire.

If a highly qualified disciple makes a humble request to a true Guru, it is never ignored by the Guru, therefore...

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O Master !  If you think that it is possible for me to see that form, then, O Lord of the Yogins, please show me Your Immortal Self.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
If you think, O Lord, that it can be seen by me, then, O Lord of Yoga, reveal Yourself to me completely.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Lord, if You think that it is possible to be seen by me, then, O Lord of Yoga, You show me Your eternal Self.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Prabhu' means the one who is capable/powerful. In the Mokshadharma, it is declared: 'There is no being superior to that eternal Purusha.' Thus, 'Prabhu' is designated as the ruler and the capable one, etc.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Raising the doubt, 'Why is there a desire to see if one is unqualified to see?', Arjuna says: 'manyase' (if You think). He is called 'Prabhu' because He is capable of creation, preservation, destruction, entry, and governance. By metonymy, the word 'Yoga' stands for 'Yogis'. He explains 'tatah' (then), etc., in the sense of 'yasmat' (since).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O Lord! If You think that Your supreme divine form can be seen by me, then, O Lord of Yoga, show me Your imperishable Self.

Explanation—'Prabho'—The name 'Prabhu' belongs to the all-powerful. Therefore, the feeling behind this address seems to be that if You think I have the capacity to see the Cosmic Form, then it is fine; otherwise, give me such capacity so that I can see Your divine form. 'Manyase yadi tacchakyam maya drastumiti'—This implies that even if You do not show Your form, I will still believe that Your form is exactly as You say, but I am not entitled, worthy, or fit to see it. Thus, Arjuna does not have the slightest doubt in the words of the Lord, but rather has firm faith. That is why he says: show me Your Cosmic Form. 'Yogesvara'—The feeling behind addressing Him as 'Yogesvara' seems to be that You are the Master of all possible Yogas, such as Bhakti Yoga, Jnana Yoga, Karma Yoga, Dhyana Yoga, Hatha Yoga, Raja Yoga, Laya Yoga, Mantra Yoga, etc. Therefore, by Your extraordinary power of Yoga, please show me that Cosmic Form too. In the seventeenth verse of the tenth chapter, Arjuna addressed the Lord as 'Yogin', that is, he called the Lord a Yogi; but now Arjuna has addressed the Lord as 'Yogesvara', that is, he has called Him the Master of all Yogas. The reason for this is that there has been a great change in Arjuna's perception of the Lord since the beginning of the tenth chapter. 'Tato me tvam darshayātmanamavyayam'—Your form is indeed imperishable, from which infinite universes arise, remain established, and dissolve into it. Show me such an imperishable form of Yours.

Relationship—Hearing Arjuna's humble prayer in the previous verse, the Lord now commands Arjuna to see the Universal Form.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
If You think that Your form as all-creator, as all-ruler and as all-supporter, can be seen by me, then, O Lord of Yoga - Yoga is the property of having knowledge and other auspicious attributes, for it will be said later on:  'Behold My Lordly Yoga' (11.8) - O treasure of knowledge, strength, sovereignty, valour, power and glory which are inconceivable in any one else! Reveal Yourself to me completely. 'Avyayam' (completely) is an adverb. The meaning is, 'Reveal everything about Yourself to me.'

Thus, prayed to by Arjuna, who was desirous to know, and whose voice was therefore choked with fervour, the Lord said as follows to him:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Prabho, O Lord, Master; yadi, if; manyase, You think; iti, that; tat sakyam, it is possible; drastum, to be see; maya, by me, by Arjuna; tatah, then, since I am very eager to see, therefore; yogeswara, O Lord of Yoga, of yogis-Yoga stands for yogis; their Lord is yogeswara; tvam, You; darsaya, show; me, me, for my sake; atmanam avyayam, Your eternal Self.
Being thus implored by Arjuna,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
In the phrase 'manyase yadi', the word 'Prabhu' is used not merely in the sense of ownership, but with the implication that due to Your supreme capability, even the super-sensuous can be perceived by Your power alone. With this intention, the commentator explains 'prabhuh' (as capable/powerful). He adduces proof for the Lord's unsurpassed capability: 'nāsti' (there is none higher). Here, 'bhūtam' means capable. He quotes a lexicon to show that the word 'Prabhu' means capable: 'prabhuh' (meaning ruler and capable, etc.).

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Even in this, this vision is not obtainable by my own efforts, but only by Your will; hence Arjuna says: 'manyase yadi' (if You think). By addressing Him as 'Yogesvara', he implies: even an ordinary yogi displays his greatness, but You are the Lord of Yoga, all-powerful, so show it. Or, if one asks, 'Why do you praise Me, the son of Vasudeva, who am seated as your charioteer?' Arjuna addresses Him as 'Yogesvara' to show: 'Do not be thus misled; I know You to be the Supreme Person (Purushottama) and the Supreme Lord (Paramesvara) through faith in the words of Vyasa and other sages.' The idea is that showing Your divine majesty requires no effort on Your part, as You are the Lord of Yoga.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Anticipating the question, 'If you are unfit to see, why do you wish to see?', Arjuna says: 'manyase' (if You think). 'Prabhu' is one who is capable of creation, preservation, destruction, entry, and governance; hence, 'O प्रभो (Lord), Master of all!' If You think, i.e., know or wish, that Your divine form can be seen by me (Arjuna); O योगेश्वर (Lord of Yoga), the Lord of all yogic powers and Yogis who possess powers like anima (minuteness) etc.; then, solely by Your will, to me who is intensely desirous, You, who are supremely compassionate, show (make the object of my visual perception) Your imperishable, decayless Self endowed with divine majesty.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
And it is not that You must show that form merely because I wish to see it. What then? He says: 'manyase' (if You think). 'Yoga' belongs to Yogis; and You are their Lord (Yogesvara). If You think that that form can be seen by me, Arjuna, then show me Your eternal, imperishable Self endowed with that form.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
If You think (contemplate) that it is possible to be seen by me, then show, i.e., make visible, Your imperishable Self (which is devoid of decay) to me. Arjuna means: 'I am not giving You an order, but I am praying.' To indicate that ordering You, who are the Lord of Brahma and others, is improper, he addresses Him as 'O Prabho' (O Lord). Alternatively, the intention behind this address is: 'Even if I lack the capacity to see, You are capable of showing it.' Since You are the Lord (Ishvara) of Yogas—meaning, by metonymy, Yogis who are capable of seeing the divine form—therefore, make me also a Yogi and show Yourself; hinting at this, he addresses Him as: 'O Yogesvara!'

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The pronoun 'tat' (that) refers to the form described earlier, such as being the creator of all, etc. Here too, whether it refers to the essential nature, the physical form, or merely the modes, should be understood as discussed previously.

'Yoga is the association with auspicious attributes like knowledge, etc.'—here, the lordly power of anima (minuteness) etc., is also included in these qualities. However, the mere performance of yoga is not intended here because it is not directly related to the form desired to be seen. For, the form that is going to be shown is what is desired to be seen here. Arjuna is not being shown any other subject like Ashtanga-yoga. To show that the word 'Yoga' is recognized in this sense, Ramanuja quotes, 'Behold [My Lordly Yoga]'.

By using the word 'Prabhu' (Lord), it is implied that: 'If You think so, then nothing is difficult for You.' To show this possession of extraordinary attributes, Ramanuja states, 'which are inconceivable in anyone else'. Or this explains the intent behind the word 'Yogesvara'. The word 'Yogesvara' is used either due to the abundance of attributes (like 'Lord of horses', 'Lord of wealth') or because He governs the attributes themselves.

The word 'tvam' (Yourself) is used because any other interpretation of the word 'atmanam' is inappropriate, and the Lord will later say 'mam' (Me).

To remove the doubt that the word 'avyayam' (imperishable/complete) is superfluous here, and to avoid any contradiction with showing that form which is called the perishable universe, Ramanuja explains 'avyayam' as pointing to the object desired by the seeker.

Ramanuja states that 'avyayam' is an adverb. What is the significance of this? He explains it as 'tvam sakalam' (You completely), meaning the form characterized by all attributes, glories, and manifestations.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Arjuna submits: 'Even if I have the desire, if the Lord's will is absent, then even insisting to see does not bear fruit'; indicating this, he says: 'manyase' (if You think). O Prabhu (Lord), capable of doing all actions! If You think that that form can be seen by me, and that it will bear fruit after seeing, and if You think 'let it bear fruit', then, O Yogesvara! Yogis reveal their power through their own yogic strength; their yoga is an acquired attribute. But You are the Lord of Yoga itself. Therefore, kindly granting me the capacity to see, please show it. In such a prayer, if the Lord shows that form and merges Arjuna into it, then the experience of the Purushottama form, which is relished through the essence of devotion (bhakti-rasa), would be lost. Therefore he says: 'tatah' (then), meaning: after the fulfillment of this desire. Show me Your imperishable, indestructible Self, which is the blissful Purushottama—this is the idea.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
In the phrase 'manyase' (if You think): O Yogesvara, Lord of Yogas and Yogis! If You think that that form can be seen by me, i.e., if You see in me the eligibility to behold it, then show me Your imperishable, Maya-composed (mayamaya) Self. Its imperishability (avyayatvam) is precisely due to its being Maya-composed. For it is well known that in Maya, everything of the nature of all exists at all times. As has been stated by Sage Vasistha: 'Behold the play of Maya—the present, past, and future, the gross and the subtle, the far and the near, a moment and an eon—all exist established in the Consciousness-Self.' Indeed, the lake of a mirage does not dry up gradually. Therefore, the imperishability of this divine form of the Lord is due to its being composed of Maya.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that unlimited universal Self.

 It is said that one can neither see, hear, understand nor perceive the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, by the material senses. But if one is engaged in loving transcendental service to the Lord from the beginning, then one can see the Lord by revelation. Every living entity is only a spiritual spark; therefore it is not possible to see or to understand the Supreme Lord. Arjuna, as a devotee, does not depend on his speculative strength; rather, he admits his limitations as a living entity and acknowledges Kṛṣṇa’s inestimable position. Arjuna could understand that for a living entity it is not possible to understand the unlimited infinite. If the infinite reveals Himself, then it is possible to understand the nature of the infinite by the grace of the infinite. The word yogeśvara is also very significant here because the Lord has inconceivable power. If He likes, He can reveal Himself by His grace, although He is unlimited. Therefore Arjuna pleads for the inconceivable grace of Kṛṣṇa. He does not give Kṛṣṇa orders. Kṛṣṇa is not obliged to reveal Himself unless one surrenders fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and engages in devotional service. Thus it is not possible for persons who depend on the strength of their mental speculations to see Kṛṣṇa.