Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śrutivipratipannā te yadā sthāsyati niścalā .
samādhāvacalā buddhistadā yogamavāpsyasi

Word Meanings:
श्रुतिविप्रतिपन्ना - perplexed by what hast
ते - thy
यदा - when
स्थास्यति - shall stand
निश्चला - immovable
समाधौ - in the Self
अचला - steady
बुद्धिः - intellect
तदा - then
योगम् - Selfrealisation
अवाप्स्यसि - shalt attain.

Life Application:
Anchor your attention within when conflicting opinions swirl around you, finding calm in unwavering inner silence.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
When your intellect, which has been distracted by hearing about various kinds of objects, becomes unwavering and steady in the nature of the Self, then you will attain the highest Yoga.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
When thy intellect, which is perplexed by the Veda text, which thou hast read, shall stand immovable and steady in the Self, then thou shalt attain Self-realisation.

श्रुतिविप्रतिपन्ना perplexed by what hast heard? ते thy? यदा when? स्थास्यति shall stand? निश्चला immovable? समाधौ in the Self? अचला steady? बुद्धिः intellect? तदा then? योगम् Selfrealisation? अवाप्स्यसि (thou) shalt attain.Commentary When your intellect which is tossed about by the conflict of opinions regarding the Pravritti Marga (the path of action) and the Nivritti Marga (the path of retirement or renunciation) has become immovable without distraction and doubt and firmly established in the Self? then thou shalt attain Selfrealisation or knowledge of the Self (AtmaJnana).

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
When the intellect, bewildered by the multiplicity of holy scripts, stands unperturbed in blissful contemplation of the Infinite, then hast thou attained Spirituality.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
When, even while receiving sense-objects through the five organs of knowledge, one's intellect remains unwavering, that person is understood to be established in Yoga. Ordinarily, the mind is thrown into many distractions because of the sense organs' contact with their objects; but the mind of one established in Yoga remains unshaken amid all of this. This point is elaborated further ahead under the characteristics of the man of steady wisdom (sthitaprajna). Many commentators also read this verse to mean: one whose intellect is not shaken upon hearing the seemingly conflicting doctrines of different philosophers is understood to be established in Yoga. Through the arguments presented so far, Arjuna's interest in the subject begins to grow and the hold of his delusion starts to weaken. Forgetting his own grief, and himself growing interested in Sri Krishna's teaching, he could not restrain his eagerness to learn the characteristics of the man of wisdom. His question clearly shows that he is beginning to grasp the Lord's teaching, yet something in his mind still kept him from accepting it fully. Getting the opportunity to ask, and eager to know the characteristics of one whose intellect is established in equanimity, Arjuna puts his question.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
When your determining faculty,  that had been [earlier] confused by your hearing [of scriptural declaration of fruits]  shall stand stable in concentration, at that time you shall attain the Yoga.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
When your intellect, well enlightened by hearing from Me and firmly placed, stands unshaken in a concentrated mind, then you will attain the vision of the self.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
When your mind that has become bewildered by hearing [S. takes the word sruti in the sense of the Vedas.-Tr.] will become unshakable and steadfast in the Self, then you will attain Yoga that arises from discrimination.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
He clarifies the same point further. Your intellect, which was earlier at variance with the scriptures -- that is, unsettled by ideas contrary to the true purport of the Vedas -- when, through firm ascertainment of the truth in accordance with the meaning of the Vedas, it becomes free from such contrary notions and thus unshaken in samadhi (immersed in supreme bliss through the direct vision of Brahman, remaining unmoved even by the beating of drums and similar disturbances), then you will attain Yoga -- that is, you will have accomplished the means to liberation.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
An objection is raised: since the perfection of discrimination and dispassion needed for purity of intellect has not yet been shown, has the time for attaining the intellect spoken of earlier not been indicated? This is answered by explaining that the state of firmness in the Self, of the intellect already endowed with discrimination as previously described, is itself the time when the intellect referred to here is attained. The word 'that' in the question refers to this specific point in time. The intellect's being 'confused by scriptures' is clarified as being unsettled through hearing of many different scriptural teachings, i.e., being thrown into distraction. The two causes mentioned indicate the culmination of dispassion, which is what is meant by 'time' here. 'Steadiness' (niscala) means freedom from distraction, and 'unmovingness' (acala) means freedom from doubt; distraction is contrary perception, and doubt is uncertainty -- this is the discrimination (viveka) referred to. The wisdom born through such discrimination is the intellect spoken of earlier; samadhi is fixed abidance in that very state.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
When your intellect, wavering because of conflicting scriptural opinions, becomes steady, and becomes unmoving in the Supreme, then you will attain Yoga.

Explanation: Having crossed the worldly bog of delusion, the disciple must still cross the delusion born of the many conflicting scriptural opinions -- it is to spur this crossing that Krishna speaks this verse. In Arjuna's mind there is exactly such a conflict (shrutivipratipatti): it feels wrong to destroy his elders and kinsmen, yet it also feels wrong to abandon his kshatriya duty of fighting. If he protects the family there will be no war, and if he fights the family will not be protected -- caught between these two, Arjuna's intellect is wavering. Krishna therefore urges him to make the intellect steady with regard to such scriptural conflicts, and unmoving with regard to attaining God.

A seeker first doubts whether to set right his worldly dealings or to seek God. He then resolves that he has only to serve the world and desires nothing from it in return; with this resolve, detachment from enjoyments and dispassion (vairagya) begin to arise. Once this happens and the seeker turns toward God, he encounters many conflicting scriptural opinions about the goal and the means to it, and it becomes very hard to decide which goal to accept and which method to follow. But through satsang (holy company) he settles his own inclination, faith, and fitness; or, where no such resolution is possible, he takes refuge in God and calls upon Him.

To sever the relationship with the world, the intellect must become 'steady' (nishchala) -- this is what is meant by the phrase 'freedom from union with sorrow' in chapter six, verse twenty-three. And to forge the relationship with God, the intellect must become 'unmoving' (achala) -- this is what is meant by 'equanimity is called Yoga' in chapter two, verse forty-eight.

The 'attainment of Yoga' spoken of here is not the ending of a previous separation from God followed by a new union, since one is never actually separated from God. Rather, it is the complete severance of the mistaken relationship one had assumed with unreal (asat) things -- that is, being established in one's ever-existing true state of eternal union (nitya-yoga) with God. That real state is so unique that separation from it is never actually possible; terms like union, separation, or yoga do not truly apply to it. Only the relinquishing of the imagined relationship with the unreal has here been given the name 'Yoga'. In truth this Yoga denotes the eternal, ever-present union. When this eternal union is realised through action (service), it is called Karma-yoga; through discrimination, Jnana-yoga; through love, Bhakti-yoga; through contemplation on the dissolution of the world, Laya-yoga; through breath-control, Hatha-yoga; and through the eight limbs of yama, niyama, etc., Ashtanga-yoga.

Connection: Once delusion and the conflict of scriptural opinions have been removed, Arjuna goes on to ask about the characteristics of the person of steady intellect who has attained Yoga.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Here 'Sruti' means hearing (and not the Veda). When your intellect, which, by hearing from us, has become specially enlightened, having for its object the eternal, unsurpassed and subtle self - which belongs to a class different from all other entities -, then the intellect is firmly fixed, i.e., in a single psychosis and stands unshaken. In such a concentrated mind, purified by the performance of duties without attachment, will be generated true Yoga, which consists in the vision of the self. What is said is this:  Karma Yoga, which presupposes the knowledge of the real nature of the self obtained from the scriptures, leads to a firm devotion to knowledge known as the state of firm wisdom; and the state of 'firm wisdom;' which is in the form of devotion to knowledge, generates the vision of the self; this vision is here called Yoga.

Arjuna, thus taught, estions about the nature of 'firm wisdom' which constitutes the means for the attainment of Yoga and which itself is attainable through Karma Yoga which consists in work with detachment, and also about the mode of behaviour of a man of 'firm wisdom.'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Yada te etc.  Sruti-etc.  At the time, when the determining facult with regard to the Yoga is attained, the clear sign of recognizing it, is this :  An attitude of futility about the revealed literature that has to be listened to, that has been listened to and that is being declared.  What has been declared by the above is this :  'This present view of yours about the ruination of your race is out of place and it is due to the influence of your deceptive notion, born of mental impressions created by your listening to the teachings of those scriptures that favour the observers who are fallen deep into the course of ignorance.  But, that view shall vanish when the respect for such a teaching disappears.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
If it be asked, 'By becoming possessed of the wisdom arising from the discrimination about the Self after overcoming the turbidity of delusion, when shall I attain the yoga of the supreme Reality which is the fruit that results from Karma-yoga?', then listen to that; Yada, when at the time when; te, your; buddhih, mind; that has become sruti-vi-pratipanna, bewildered, tossed about, by hearing (the Vedas) that reveal the diverse ends, means, and (their) relationship, i.e. are filled with divergent ideas; sthasyati, will become; niscala, unshakable, free from the trubulence in the form of distractions; and acala, steadfast, that is to say, free from doubt even in that (unshakable) state; samadhau, in samadhi, that is to say, in the Self  samadhi being derived in the sense of that in which the mind is fixed; tada, then, at that time; avapsyasi, you will attain; yogam, Yoga, the enlightenment, Self-absorption, that arises from discrimination.
Having got an occasion for iniry, Arjuna, with a view to knowing the characteristics of one who has the realization of the Self, [By the word samadhi is meant the enlightenment arising from discrimination, which has been spoken of in the commentary on the previous verse. The steadfastness which the monks have in that enlightenment is called steadfastness in Knowledge. Or the phrase may mean, 'the enlightenment achieved through meditation on the Self', i.e. the realization of the supreme Goal.] asked:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
An objection may be raised: since the following verse also speaks of the practice of Yoga, is this not a needless repetition of the previous verse? By showing, through this verse, the stages of the inferior, middling, and superior aspirant, [Jayatirtha] clarifies that this verse makes explicit the very same culmination of the practice of Yoga referred to in the earlier verse. It might further be asked: does the phrase 'confused by hearing' (shrutivipratipanna) here denote dispassion born of listening [to teachings about things other than the fruits of action], as some (e.g. Bhaskara) hold -- 'dispassion born from hearing of other things'? If so, the previous verse would already denote dispassion, making 'steady' and 'unmoving' redundant. Also, since this state follows the very attainment of Yoga, how can it then be said to lead to Yoga ('then you will attain Yoga')? Resolving this, [Jayatirtha] explains: the earlier state's distinct character, gained through the strength [of that dispassion], is shown by the phrase 'well ascertained the meaning of the Vedas'; its remaining tendency to waver is shown by 'even under the sway of contrary teachings' -- indicating the culmination of mediate (indirect) knowledge. To exclude a mere continuation of that mediate knowledge, 'fixed in the direct vision of Brahman' is stated; here too the residual tendency to waver is shown by phrases such as 'even amid the beating of drums'. How this culminates is shown by 'becomes accomplished in the means, immersed in supreme bliss' -- this indicates the culmination of immediate (direct) knowledge. 'Accomplished in the means' means one who has attained the fruit through the means, the fruit itself being implied by the word 'Yoga'. The purport of both verses together is that the attainment of this state marks the very culmination of the practice of Yoga.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
In answer to the question 'When shall I attain that state?', [Vallabhacharya] replies with these two verses. When your intellect, endowed with the steadiness that comes from freedom from grief and the like, becomes truly resolute, you will then attain dispassion toward the threefold, guna-based fruit of action, whether already heard of or yet to be heard -- meaning you will no longer feel any need to inquire about it, since it is not to be accepted as the goal. When your intellect, having become such, remains unmoving and settles firmly [in samadhi], then you will attain Yoga -- the very nature of Yoga itself -- and thereby the fulfilment of your purpose.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
In answer to the question, 'For one whose inner faculty has thus been purified and who has attained such dispassion, when does the realisation of knowledge come?', [Madhusudana Sarasvati] explains: your intellect, which was earlier confused -- beset with manifold doubt and misconception -- through hearing of various promised fruits [of ritual action] without proper reflection on their true intent, will, once you perceive through purification-born discrimination the defects in those fruits and give up that distraction, become 'steady' -- free from the distraction characteristic of the waking and dreaming states -- and 'unmoving' -- free from the dissolution characteristic of deep sleep, swoon, or stupor -- thus abiding fixed in samadhi, the Supreme Self. That is, having given up the two faults of dissolution and distraction, it will become fully collected. Alternatively, 'steady' may mean free from false imagining and contrary notions, and 'unmoving' may mean that, through long, uninterrupted, and reverent practice, remaining undisturbed by any contrary impression, it will stand fixed in the Self like a lamp in a windless place. Then, at that time, you will attain Yoga -- the undivided direct realisation born of the great teaching 'That thou art', consisting in the oneness of the individual self and the Supreme Self, which is the fruit of all Yoga. Having no further goal left to accomplish, you will then become one of steady wisdom, your task fulfilled.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Then: your intellect, which until now was distracted by hearing of various worldly and Vedic matters, when it comes to rest in samadhi -- samadhi meaning that in which the mind is collected, namely the Supreme Lord -- remaining steady, undrawn toward other objects by distraction, and thereby unmoving, firmly fixed there through mastery gained by practice, free from any tendency to dissolve -- then you will attain Yoga, the fruit of Yoga, namely the realisation of Truth.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
[Question:] Since action is prescribed by you so that the Sankhya intellect may always be attained, [the reply is given thus]: When, in that state, your intellect passes beyond the impurity of delusion and lack of discrimination, then, in that state, you will attain dispassion toward both what has been heard and what is yet to be heard. Formerly your intellect, confused by hearing of many different ends and means [taught in the scriptures], on gaining dispassion toward both the heard and the yet-to-be-heard, will -- once the mind becomes fixed in the Self, free of distraction -- become steady; then you will attain Yoga, the Sankhya-yoga. This is one way of explaining both verses. Alternatively: the intellect that discriminates between the eternal and the non-eternal, purified through the practice of Yoga along with dispassion and other aids, and that qualifies one for knowledge -- when is this attained? [Reply:] When your intellect passes beyond the impurity of delusion born of an impure mind, you will attain dispassion toward the fruit of action, whether heard or yet to be heard. Such Self-discriminating intellect, gained through purification of mind, then asks when it will attain union with the Supreme as the fruit born of Karma-yoga -- to this the verse beginning 'confused by hearing' provides the answer. Both these explanations can also be derived from the [Shankara] commentary; this should be understood.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
[Purushottamji] reaffirms this same point. When your intellect becomes free of any desire to hear of the various [ritual] duties, remains unshaken -- unmoved even by duties already heard of -- and abides steady and firmly fixed of its own accord in samadhi, that is, at the time of meditating on Me, then you will attain Yoga, meaning My proximity -- you will attain it.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
[Question:] By what sign is the purification of the intellect to be recognised? [Neelkantha] answers: your intellect, which was earlier seized with doubts arising from hearing various scriptures -- such as whether the Self is eternal or non-eternal, and being eternal, whether it is an agent or non-agent, and if a non-agent, whether it is one or many, and so on -- when, having set aside false imagining and contrary notions, it becomes steady in the non-dual Brahman that is the true purport of the scriptures -- no longer shaken even by clever sophistry, free of doubt, and firmly settled through mediate knowledge -- and further becomes unmoving, free from both dissolution and distraction, fixed in the undivided inner Self, abiding firmly in samadhi -- then you will attain Yoga, that is, discriminative wisdom. The attainment of such steady, unshaken samadhi is itself the mark of a purified intellect -- this is the purport.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
When your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the Vedas, and when it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization, then you will have attained the divine consciousness.

 To say that one is in samādhi is to say that one has fully realized Kṛṣṇa consciousness; that is, one in full samādhi has realized Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. The highest perfection of self-realization is to understand that one is eternally the servitor of Kṛṣṇa and that one’s only business is to discharge one’s duties in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person, or unflinching devotee of the Lord, should not be disturbed by the flowery language of the Vedas nor be engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the heavenly kingdom. In Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one comes directly into communion with Kṛṣṇa, and thus all directions from Kṛṣṇa may be understood in that transcendental state. One is sure to achieve results by such activities and attain conclusive knowledge. One has only to carry out the orders of Kṛṣṇa or His representative, the spiritual master.