Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
devadvijaguruprājñapūjanaṃ śaucamārjavam .
brahmacaryamahiṃsā ca śārīraṃ tapa ucyate

Word Meanings:
देवद्विजगुरुप्राज्ञपूजनम् - worship of the gods
शौचम् - purity
आर्जवम् - straightforwardness
ब्रह्मचर्यम् - celibacy
अहिंसा - noninjury
च - and
शारीरम् - of the body
तपः - austerity
उच्यते - is called.

Life Application:
Practice physical austerity by respecting elders, maintaining cleanliness, and observing non-violence in your daily actions.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Worship of the gods, the twice-born (Brahmanas), the teachers, and the wise; purity, straightforwardness, celibacy, and non-injury—these are called the austerity of the body.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Worship of the gods, the twice-born, the teachers and the wise, purity, straightforwardness, celibacy and non-injury are called the austerities of the body.

देवद्विजगुरुप्राज्ञपूजनम् worship of the gods? the twicorn? the teachers and the wise? शौचम् purity? आर्जवम् straightforwardness? ब्रह्मचर्यम् celibacy? अहिंसा noninjury? च and? शारीरम् of the body? तपः austerity? उच्यते is called.Commentary Tapas Austerity or selfdiscipline.Using the feet in pilgrimage to the sacred temples using the hands in cleaning the temples? in collecting the materials of worship of God? and in performing worship prostrations to the Brahmanas? preceptors and the wise continence and noninjury? constitute physical austerity. The body is used in the service of the parents and preceptors? the poor and the sick. This is also bodily austerity. That austerity which is done by the body is physical austerity. The physical body is the chief agent in doing such austerity. Hence this is called physical austerity. The practice of nonstealing and noncovetousness are also included in physical austerity.He who has realised I am Brahman is a wise man (Prajna). A Sudra also may be a wise man. Though Vidura was a Sudra he was a sage. That is the reason why the Lord has made a separate mention of the wise.Brahmacharya means control but not suppression of the sexdesire or sexforce. If the mind is filled with sublime thoughts by meditation? Japa (repetition of a Mantra)? prayer? study of holy scriptures? eniry of Who am I? and contemplation of the sexless? pure Self? the sexdesire will be devitalised by the withdrawal of the mind. The mind also will be thinned out. Suppressed sexdesire will attack you again and again and will produce wetdreams? irritability and restlessness of the mind. The mind should be rendered pure by meditation? Japa? singing of the Lords names? and prayer. The mind should be controlled first. Then it will be easy for you to control the senses. That is the reason why the practice of Sama or the control of the mind comes first and then comes Dama or the restraint of the senses (in the order of the sixfold virtues. The senses cannot operate without the help of the mind. So the effective remedy for lust and the best aid to celibacy is to control the mind first and then the senses.Intense musing on the objects of the senses does more harm to the inner spiritual life than actual sensegratification. If the mind is not rendered pure by Sadhana? mere mortification of the external senses will not produce the desired effect. Although the external senses are mortified? their internal counterparts which are still energetic and vigorous? revenge upon the mind? and produce intense mental disturbance and wild imagination.To control the mind is diffcult for neophytes or the beginners. It will be extremely difficult to control the mind first when the senses are allowed to run riot. That is the reason why Lord Krishna says Therefore? O Arjuna? mastering first the senses? do thou slay this thing of sin (desire)? destructive of wisdom and knowledge. (Cf.III.41)The theory or doctrine that the mind should be controlled first is ite correct. This practice is intended for the firstclass type of spiritual aspirants. The middling type of students should control the senses first. The senses always have an outgoing tendency. The mind operates through the senses. Control of the one goes hand in hand with control of the other. Control of the senses is also control of the mind? because the mind is a bundle of senses only there is no mind without the senses.Just as an enemy can be easily conered if you have a twopronged attack? so also the mind can be controlled easily if you attack it on two fronts simultaneously -- an external attack on the senses and an internal attack on the mind itself by the eradication of the desires.To say? Control the mind first? you can control the senses (which is one point of view) or Control the senses first? you can control the mind easily (which is another point of view) is simply arguing in a vicious circle like Which came first -- the tree or the seed or You will get the knowledge of the Self if you control all desires -- and you can control all the desires only if you have knowledge of the Self.You need not worry yourself over this seeming paradox. Try to do either of the practices? viz.? control of the mind or control of the senses? according to your liking? capacity? taste and temperament. You can yourself find out by actual practice which is better. As you advance in your practice your doubtwill gradually disapperar and you will enjoy supreme peace and joy.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Worship of God and the Master; respect for the preacher and the philosopher; purity, rectitude, continence and harmlessness - all this is physical austerity.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Austerity of the body includes worship of the Deity (Deva), the twice-born (Dvija), the preceptor (Guru), and the wise (Prajna). It also includes physical cleanliness (Shaucha), straightforwardness (Arjavam), self-control (Brahmacharya), and non-injury (Ahimsa). Tapas is not self-mortification but rather a wise integration of physical energies for creative and spiritual growth.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The worship to the gods, to the twice-born, to the elders and to the wise; the purity, the honesty, the state of continence, and the harmlessness-all this is said to be bodily austerity.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Worship of the gods, the twice-born, the preceptors, the enlightened ones, purity, uprightness, continence and non-injury, these are called austerity of the body.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The worship of gods, twice-borns, venerable persons and the wise; purity, straightforwardness, celibacy and non-injury,-are said to be bodily austerity.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that physical austerity is performed primarily by the body. It includes the worship of gods, learned Brahmanas, teachers, and wise ones through prostration and service, bodily cleanliness, straightforwardness, avoiding sexual misconduct, and non-injury of living beings.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Worship of the gods, the twice-born, teachers, and the wise; cleanliness, straightforwardness, celibacy, and non-injury—these are called the austerity of the body.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'Deva' refers to deities like Vishnu, Shiva, Ganesha, Durga, and Surya, or Vedic gods. 'Dvija' refers to Brahmanas who should be respected. 'Guru' refers to parents, teachers, and elders. 'Prajna' refers to spiritually realized souls. Their worship means showing respect and serving them. Cleanliness (Shaucha) refers to external purity, and straightforwardness (Arjavam) means having no deceit. Celibacy (Brahmacharya) and non-injury (Ahimsa) are the other components of bodily austerity.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The worship of the gods, the twice-born, preceptors and enlightened ones; purity, viz., by ablutions in sacred water; uprightness, viz., bodily action in accordance with the mind; continence, viz., absence of looking at women etc., considering them as objcts of pleasure; non-injury, viz., not hurting any being - these constitute the austerity of the body.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.14–17.16 jointly): Deva - etc.  upto manasam ucyate :  Honesty :  uprightness, i.e.,  the courage regarding what needs no hiding.  Which is true :  This is explained by 'Which is pleasant and beneficial'.  Pleasant : at the time of [hearing]  that speech.  And beneficial :  something in future.  This type of speech, but not merely speaking what actually happened, is called  'speaking the truth'.  Purity of thought :  'Thought'  denotes intention; its highest purity.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Deva-dvija-guru-pujanam, the worship of gods, twice-borns, venerable persons and the wise; saucam, purity; arjavam, straightforwardness; brahmacarayam, celibacy; and ahimsa, non-injury; ucyate, are said to be; sariram, bodily; tapah, austerity, austerity accomplished through the body: that which can be performed by the agent, etc. [See 18. 13-15.-Tr.], (i.e.) with the whole group of body and organs, in which the body predominates; for the Lord will say, 'these five are its causes' (18.15).

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that to describe the Gunas in austerities, the Lord first explains the bodily, vocal, and mental divisions in three verses starting with this one.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that 'bodily austerity' is that performed primarily through the physical body. It consists of: worship of gods, twice-born, preceptors, and the wise; cleanliness (using clay and water); straightforwardness (consistence in behavior); celibacy (abstinence); and non-injury to all creatures.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that physical austerity is that where the body is the main instrument. Cleaning temples, serving elders, keeping the body clean, straightforward behavior, celibacy, and non-injury constitute this.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that physical austerity (Shariram Tapah) is that performed by the physical body. Worshiping deities, Brahmanas, and wise teachers, bodily cleanliness, uprightness, celibacy, and non-violence are the main aspects of this austerity.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'bodily austerity' is called so because the body is the primary instrument of action. It consists of worship of gods, twice-born, gurus, and wise men; bodily purity, straightforwardness, celibacy, and non-injury.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that physical austerity involves physical actions like worshiping deities, twice-born, gurus, and wise souls. Cleanliness, straightforwardness, celibacy, and non-injury are essential for purifying the physical body.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that physical austerity (Shariram Tapah) is that where the body is the main performer. Worship of gods, twice-born, preceptors, wise men, cleanliness, uprightness, celibacy, and non-injury form this austerity.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Austerity of the body consists in worship of the Supreme Lord, the brāhmaṇas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the father and mother, and in cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence.

 The Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and penance. First He explains the austerities and penances practiced by the body. One should offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to the demigods, the perfect, qualified brāhmaṇas and the spiritual master and superiors like father, mother or any person who is conversant with Vedic knowledge. These should be given proper respect. One should practice cleansing oneself externally and internally, and he should learn to become simple in behavior. He should not do anything which is not sanctioned by the scriptural injunctions. He should not indulge in sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scripture only in marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These are penances and austerities as far as the body is concerned.