Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
tadityanabhisandhāya phalaṃ yajñatapaḥkriyāḥ .
dānakriyāśca vividhāḥ kriyante mokṣakāṅkṣibhiḥ

Word Meanings:
तत् - That
इति - thus
अनभिसन्धाय - without aiming at
फलम् - fruit
यज्ञतपःक्रियाः - acts of sacrifice and
दानक्रियाः - acts of charity
च - and
विविधाः - various
क्रियन्ते - are performed
मोक्षकाङ्क्षिभिः - by seekers of liberation

Life Application:
Uttering 'Tat' without seeking fruit, acts of sacrifice, austerity, and gift are performed by seekers of liberation.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Pronouncing 'TAT' (meaning That), without seeking the fruits of actions, the seekers of liberation perform various acts of sacrifice, austerity, and charity.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Uttering ï1Tatï1, without aiming at the fruits, are the acts of sacrifice and austerity and the various acts of gifts performed by the seekers of liberation.

तत् That? इति thus? अनभिसन्धाय without aiming at? फलम् fruit? यज्ञतपःक्रियाः acts of sacrifice and austerity? दानक्रियाः acts of gits? च and? विविधाः various? क्रियन्ते are performed? मोक्षकाङ्क्षिभिः by the seekers of liberation.Commentary With Tat With the utterance of the word Tat (That).Phalam Fruit of sacrifice? austerity and charity.Danakriyah Acts of charity such as gifts of land? gold? rice? clothes? etc.The immortal Soul which transcends the whole world? the three Gunas? the three bodies? the three,states of waking? dreaming and deep sleep? which illumines everything? which is the basis of all? and the source of everything is connoted by the word Tat. The sages and the aspirants meditate on Tat. They utter the word Tat and say? May all our actions and the fruits of them be in the name of Tat (That or Brahman).Thus they offer all actions and their fruits to Brahman and practise renunciation. They are freed from egoism and the bondage of Karma. They attain Selfrealisation through purity of heart caused by selfless? motiveless and desireless actions.The actions that is ennobled and sanctified by uttering Om at the beginning and which is offered to That is transformed into the nature of Brahman. All actions in their entirety? O Arjuna? culminate in wisdom (IV.33). He who does the actions with the spirit of sacrifice becomes Brahman eventually.Tat is symbolic of the presentation of all the fruits of all such activities to Brahman. If you utter Tat? it is tantamount to saying? They are nt mine. What has been begun with Om is given away to Brahman with the utterance of Tat.The use of Sat is described in the following verse.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Those who desire deliverance begin their acts of sacrifice, austerity or gift with the word Tat' (meaning That'), without thought of reward.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Seekers of liberation (mokshakankshibhih) perform sacrifices, austerities, and various acts of charity without seeking results, dedicating them to the Supreme by uttering 'TAT'. Chanting 'TAT' signifies that the act is offered to the universal Self, helping the seeker destroy past tendencies (vasanas) without creating new ones, which is the state of liberation.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
With  [the utterance of]  TAT  and without aiming at the fruit, the acts of sacrifice and austerity and the various acts of gifts are performed by those who seek emancipation.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Acts of sacrifice, of austeritty and of various gifts are performed without aiming at reward by those who seek release, after pronouncing Tat.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
After (uttering) the word tat, acts of sacrifice and austerity as also the various acts of charity are performed without regard for results by persons aspiring for Liberation.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that after explaining the application of the syllable 'OM', the Lord describes the application of 'TAT'. The word 'TAT' points to Brahman. Uttering 'TAT' before performing scriptural duties shows that the action is directed towards the Supreme, without any lower motivations.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Chanting the word 'TAT', which refers to the Supreme Brahman, and without seeking the fruits of actions, various acts of sacrifice, austerity and charity are performed by seekers of liberation.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'TAT' points to the eternal Reality that exists before, during, and after any action and its fruit. Uttering 'TAT' indicates that everything belongs to the Supreme. Seeking liberation, the aspirant surrenders all actions and possessions ('ahanta' and 'mamata') to God. By performing sacrifices, gifts, and austerities in this selfless manner, the bond of egoism is dissolved, leading to the experience of the eternal Brahman.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Whatever acts such as the study of the Vedas, sacrifices, austerities and gifts are done without aiming at results by those of the first three stations, seeking only final release - these are designated by the term Tat referring to the brahman, since they constitute the means for attainment of brahman. For it is well known that the term Tat signifies brahman, as in the following passage:  He is Sah,Vah, Kah, Kim, Yat, Tat, Padam, Anuttamam.' (M.B., 13.254.91). Thus, the study of the Vedas, sacrifices etc., which are the means of attaining release, have been stated; the connection of Tat has been spoken of since the word Tat signifies them (i.e., the study of Vedas etc.). The connection of the term Tat with the three stations is shown because of their practising the study of the Vedas etc., in the way stated.

In order to show how the term Sat is connected with these, Sri Krsna shows the etymology of the term Sat, as it is prevalent in the world:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.23–17.27 jointly): Om etc. upto abhidhiyate.  An indication of the Brahman i.e., an act of facing (or aiming at)  the Brahman is made by these  three words viz.,  OM, TAT and SAT.  Of  them, Om indicates that 'This purport of the scriptures is [to be]  accepted as long as one has bodily connection'.

The pronoun TAT, which denotes generality and which is incapable of denoting exclusively a particular, mentions, as far as the Brahman is concerned, the absence of intention for fruit.  An intention is not possible without reference to something particular. No doubt  [TAT] may denote all particulars  [in general]. But it would lead to intending the fruits and the doer-ship with regard to all [in general].  Even then [the Brahman] cannot have connection with any particular fruit.

The Vedic word SAT denotes 'praise'.  The act, like this sacrifice etc., though performed, turns out to be an act of the Tamas (evil act) if it is performed with the idea, 'It is an evil act'.  Further, what is performed  with an intention for a particular fruit is not praiseworthy, and it causes nothing but bondage. Therefore, those, who bear in mind, 'This is a thing to be performed' - they are not fettered, even though they perform acts like sacrifice etc.  With this idea only, it has been said in the Adiparvan as -

'The austerity is not dirt, nor the [Vedic] study, nor the natural ritual enjoined by the Vedas, and nor the act of earning wealth by all efforts.  But, if they are struck by mind, they themselves become dirt.' (MB, Adi. i, 210).

[Here in this passage]  dirt that which fetters.  Natural :  [That is, ordained ], such as - 'Without expecting anything, a Brahman should learn the Vedas etc., together with their six subsidiaries' etc.

By all effort :  by the act that is suitable and is well known in the scriptures and in the worldly practice.  By mind :  by the mind that is yoked to the triad of the Strands, Sattva etc.  [Those actions that]  have been simply ruined  [by that mind], are binding and not otherwise.  This is the idea here.

Therefore, the acts like sacrifice etc., and the acts, like acquiring  [Wealth] etc., for that purpose, have to be performed as being inevitable as long as the body exists.

Or, perhaps, the word  OM  conveys  [with regard to the Brahman]  the idea of That in Which the entire universe has been totally calmed down.  TAT conveys the idea of That of the nature of Sovereign  Independence of Will, which is nothing but comprehending the rising waves in the form of the universe.  And the word SAT denotes the act of manifestation by the Brahman - even though It is complete in Itself - as [the universe]  having  varied nature, a manifestation that  causes differences  (or duality) expanding under the weight of its Sovereign  Independence of Will.  Hence it has been said  'In the sense of manifesting as beings and in the sense of manifesting  perfectly  [SAT is employed].'  Thus, having in front  [as a cause]  that aspect  (the Soul) of  highly tranquil nature; and having in the  centre that aspect which is well connected with desire-waves viz., the desire to make gift, the desire to perform sacrifice and the desire to observe penance; this final body radiates  (or dances)  filled with a group of activities, such as  offering gift, performing sacrifice and observing austerity, and of what are conducive to them.  This triad is indeed simultaneously the inherent nature of the Unhindered One (the Soul).  So, what fruit could be there ?  And to whom ?  How ?  Whence ?  Where ?  And by what means ?

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
After uttering the word tat, which is a name of Brahman, yajna-tapah-kriyah, acts of sacrifice and austerity; ca, as also; vividhah, the various; dana-kriyah, acts of charity, such as gift of land, gold, etc.; kriyante, are performed; anabhisandhaya, without regard for; phalam, results of actions; moksa-kanksibhih, by persons aspiring for Liberation.
The use of the words Om and tat has been stated. Thereafter, the use of the word sat is bieng presently stated:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that 'TAT' is a direct name of Brahman. Therefore, the seekers of liberation perform all sacrifices, austerities, and gifts after chanting 'TAT', signifying that Brahman alone is the ultimate fruit of all their efforts.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that 'TAT' is the famous name of Brahman in the Upanishadic Mahavakya 'Tat Tvam Asi'. Performance of sacrifices, gifts, and austerities after pronouncing 'TAT' is done by seekers of liberation solely for the purification of the heart (antahkarana-shuddhi), completely renouncing the desire for any other fruits.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that by pronouncing 'TAT' before performing actions, seekers of liberation ensure that they do not bind themselves with the desire for results. Uttering 'TAT' helps in dedicating the work to Brahman, which purifies the mind and leads to liberation.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that after explaining 'OM', the application of 'TAT' is described. The seekers of liberation perform sacrifices, gifts, and austerities by uttering the name of Brahman, 'TAT', completely ignoring the personal results of these actions.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that 'TAT' points to the goal of attaining Brahman. Since the performance of sacrifices, gifts, and study of the Veda are the means to reach Brahman, seekers of liberation perform them under the name of 'TAT', directing all results towards Brahman rather than worldly gains like heaven.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that after describing the name for devotees, the Lord describes the fruit of the second name 'TAT' for jnanis. By uttering 'TAT' to obey Brahman's command and please Him, seekers of liberation perform actions like Agnihotra and austerities without desiring rewards like heaven. Chanting 'TAT' makes these actions perfect and causes them to yield liberation.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that while the syllable 'OM' is used for both desire-driven and desireless actions, the name 'TAT' is specifically used for desireless actions performed by seekers of liberation. They perform actions with the mindset that 'all this is Brahman,' as in IV.24 (Brahmarpanam Brahma Havih...). Chanting 'TAT' keeps the mind fixed on Brahman rather than the temporary fruits.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Without desiring fruitive results, one should perform various kinds of sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from material entanglement.

 To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any material gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of being transferred to the spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.