Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
tatraivaṃ sati kartāramātmānaṃ kevalaṃ tu yaḥ .
paśyatyakṛtabuddhitvānna sa paśyati durmatiḥ

Word Meanings:
तत्र - there
एवम् - thus
सति - being
कर्तारम् - as the agent
आत्मानम् - the Self
केवलम् - alone
तु - verily
यः - who
पश्यति - sees
अकृतबुद्धित्वात् - owing to untrained understanding
न - not
सः - he
पश्यति - sees
दुर्मतिः - of perverted intelligence.

Life Application:
This being so, he who sees Self as sole doer due to uncultivated intellect does not see, deluded.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Such being the case, he who, owing to an unrefined intellect, looks upon the absolute Self alone as the agent, that person of perverted intelligence does not see (the truth) at all.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Now, such being the case, verily he who  owing to untrained understanding  looks upon his Self, which is isolated, as the agent, he of perverted intelligence, sees not.

तत्र there (the case)? एवम् thus? सति being? कर्तारम् as the agent? आत्मानम् the Self? केवलम् alone? तु verily? यः who? पश्यति sees? अकृतबुद्धित्वात् owing to untrained understanding? न not? सः he? पश्यति sees? दुर्मतिः of perverted intelligence.Commentary The Self is always actionless. He is unattached like ether. He is always the silent witness. He is the spectator of activity. The egoistic man of little understanding only thinks that he is the real agent? and so he is bound by actions. He takes birth again and again to reap the fruits of his actions. For him who considers the body as consciousness? God or the Self? it naturally follows that the Self is the agent or the doer. He who identifies himself with the body? who has taken the body as the pure Self? has cast a net over himself? and he leads a deluded life of utter ignorance. He is bound by the fetters or bonds of Karma. He is ever shut up in the prisonhouse of this body.He who has not united himself with the Buddhi? who has got an impure or untrained understanding? who regards the Self as the actor or the agent is certainly a man of perverted intelligence. He is deluded. He is really a blind man. He sees not though he has eyes. He does not behold the essence of things. He has no idea of the supreme Principle (the Self) Which is Itself actionless? Which ever stands as a silent witness of the activities of all minds and all organs of all beings? Which moves the minds? organs and the lifeforce and the bodies to action? just as the magnet makes the iron pieces move. He does not behold the truth about the Self and action.Durmati Evilminded person A man of perverted intellect or undeveloped reason. He thinks that he alone is the doer or agent. He does not understand anything. He has no knowledge of the,actionless? pure? selfluminous Self.The ignorant man of untrained understanding identifies himself with the five causes and regards the pure actionless Self as the agent or doer of the actions which are really done by these five causes. What is the reason for this Why does he regard them so Because he is not endowed with a pure and subtle intellect his understanding (Buddhi) has not been trained in the practice of Vedanta he is not eipped with the four means of salvation his intellect has not been trained by the teachings of the preceptor or the spiritual teacher in the methods of logical reasoning.He who considers that the pure actionless Self is the agent or the doer is certainly a man of untrained understanding. He has no knowledge of the actionless Self and action. Therefore? he is a man of perverted intelligence. His intellect works or moves in the wrong direction. His intellect moves in the sensual grooves or avenues. It runs like the vicious horse and leads to birth and death. The technie of Buddhi Yoga taught in the Gita enables one effectively to prevent this.He does not perceive or cognise the Truth though he has eyes. Though he sees? he sees the external? gross? illusory? everchanging? perishable objects only. He does not behold the one immortal? unchanging? allblissful essence? which is the basis or substratum of everything. He is like the man with jaundiced eyes? who sees all objects tinged with yellow colur? or like the man suffering from diplopia who beholds many moons? or like the man who thinks that the moon moves when the clouds move? or like the man who? seated in a train? imagines that the trees are moving when it is the train that is really moving. (Cf.V.15XIII.30)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
But the fool who supposes, because of his immature judgment, that it is his own Self alone that acts, he perverts the truth and does not see rightly.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In the previous verse we saw that in the presence of the Self, the insentient limiting adjuncts like the body, etc., perform actions, but the Self remains a non-agent (non-doer). In the absence of this discrimination between the Self and the non-Self, ignorant people consider themselves as the experiencing individual soul (jiva) who is the doer and the enjoyer. In the state of the individual soul, attachment and aversion, activity and retirement, gain and loss, and pleasure and pain are inevitable. The moment a person understands the distinction between the Self and the non-Self, and the false ego generated by ignorance, at that very moment the existence of this false individual soul vanishes like the ghost of a daydream. This being the case, all kinds of proper and improper actions are performed only with the help of the body, the doer, the ten organs, and destiny; but the Self, which provides consciousness to them, remains eternally pure and a non-agent. Ignorant people look upon this Self itself as the doer. The indication of the causes of this kind of perverted knowledge is made here by two words: "akrta-buddhi" (uncultivated understanding) and "durmati" (perverted intellect). "akrta-buddhi" means a man who has not refined his intellect through the scriptures, the teachings of preceptors, and logical reasoning (nyaya); and "durmati" means a person whose intellect is associated with wicked attachment, aversion, etc. The implication of this statement is that a man who, purifying his mind, contemplates on the Self, directly experiences in himself that the insentient limiting adjuncts like the body, etc., alone perform actions and feel fatigue, not the actionless Self. After describing perverted knowledge, He now describes correct knowledge:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
But this being the case, whosoever views himself as the sole agent (cause of actions) due to his imperfect intellect - he, the defective-minded one, does not view  [things rightly].

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Such being the case, he who sees only the self as the agent on account of the uncultivated understanding - he, of wicked mind, does not see at all.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
This being the case, anyone, who, owing to the imperfection of his intellect, perceives the absolute Self as the agent, that man does not perceive (properly), and has a perverted intellect.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
"kevalam" means actionless. "For they declare this absolute Self to be actionless" — in that very passage.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having attributed the agency of actions to the seat, etc., He refers to the ignorant man's view of the Self in them, in: "tatra...". Taking the word "tatra" which refers to all actions under discussion, he states the literal meaning in connection with the previous statement: "evam...". Since, the agency of the seat, etc. being established in the manner stated, he perceives the agency of others by superimposing it on the Self, therefore he is of perverted intellect (durmati). He states this in: "tatra evam sati", meaning "one who looks upon the Self as the agent". He explains "the doer...": "tatra..." etc. "in them" means in the seat, etc. which are superimposed with the idea of Self. To the question: "Why does he look upon the actionless Self as the doer?", he states the reason through a question: "Why...?" Objection: "But only one whose intellect is refined by the scriptures and who holds that the Self is distinct from the body accepts its agency; he, even though seeing agency in the Self, cannot be of uncultivated intellect." To this he says: "who also...". The meaning is: since his intellect also has not been cultivated by the teachings of teachers preceded by scriptures, and by reasoning following them, his being of uncultivated intellect is established. The truth of the Self is its immutability, and the truth of action is its not touching the Self because it is performed by the seat, etc. created by ignorance. The absence of the perception of the truth of the Self and action is the meaning of the word "atah" (hence). To clarify the wickedness, he explains "perverted intellect" (durmatitvam) as: "reaped in births..." etc. To show that even if an ignorant person sees: "I am the doer", he does not really see, he gives an illustration: "just as...". Just as a man with eyes affected by Timira (cataract), even though seeing many moons, does not see it in truth, so also the ignorant person, even though looking upon the Self as the doer, does not see it in truth. This is the meaning. He gives another illustration for the superimposition of their activity on one's own Self by the Self which is connected with the seat, etc. by ignorance: "or as...". Just as when other carrying men are running, a person seated in the vehicle, due to lack of discrimination, imagines himself to be running fast; so also when the seat, etc. are the doers of activity, the man of perverted intellect who thinks his own Self residing in them to be the doer, does not see. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
However, even though there are these five causes, he who, in that matter (of actions), regards the absolute (pure) Self alone as the doer, that person of perverted intellect does not understand rightly; because his intellect is not pure. Commentary — tatraivaṃ sati... paśyati durmatiḥ — All actions that occur, happen only through the five causes — seat, doer, instrument, effort, and destiny — and not through one's own Self. But even though this is the case, the man who considers his own Self as the doer, his intellect is not pure — "akṛtabuddhitvāt" — i.e., he has not given importance to discrimination and reflection. He has not paid attention to the real discrimination, the separation between the insentient and the conscious, between Nature (prakriti) and Spirit (purusha). Therefore, a defect has entered his intellect. Due to that defect, he considers himself the doer. Although the words "akṛtabuddhitvāt" and "durmatiḥ" appearing here seem to have similar meanings, there is a slight difference between them. The word "akṛtabuddhitvāt" is used as a cause, and "durmatiḥ" is used as an adjective for the agent; i.e., the unrefined intellect (akrutabuddhi) is the cause of the doer being of perverted intellect (durmati). The implication is that only due to not purifying the intellect — i.e., not awakening discrimination in the intellect — he is a man of perverted intellect. If he had awakened discrimination, he would not have remained of perverted intellect. The absolute (pure) Self does nothing — "neither acts nor is tainted" (Gita 13.31) — but due to identification, the realization: "I do not act" does not occur. The unrefined intellect alone is the cause of the lack of realization; i.e., he who has not purified his intellect, that very person of perverted intellect considers himself the doer, whereas there is no agency in the pure Self. The word "kevalam" (alone/absolute) has appeared in both Karma-yoga and Sankhya-yoga. Karma-yoga and Sankhya-yoga proceed on the basis of discrimination between Nature and Spirit. In Karma-yoga, all activities are performed only by the body, mind, intellect, and senses, but no connection is established with them, i.e., there is no sense of possessiveness (mamata) in them. Due to the absence of possessiveness, the unity of the body, mind, etc. with the universe is experienced. As soon as unity is experienced, one's self-established state in the Self is experienced. Therefore, in Karma-yoga, the word "kevalaiḥ" (alone) is used with body, mind, intellect, and senses — "by the body, mind, intellect, and senses alone" (Gita 5.11). In Sankhya-yoga, discrimination and reflection predominate. Whatever actions occur, they happen only through the five causes, and not through one's own Self. But one whose mind is deluded by egoism considers himself the doer. Delusion is destroyed by discrimination. With delusion destroyed, how can he consider himself the doer? i.e., he experiences his own pure nature. Therefore, in Sankhya-yoga, the word "kevalam" is used with the Self — "absolute Self". Now, one point is to be specially noted here: in Karma-yoga, because the word "kevala" is associated with body, mind, etc., the ego (aham) along with the body, mind, intellect, etc., will be engaged in the service of the universe, and the Self will remain as it is. And in Sankhya-yoga, because "kevalam" is associated with the Self, a subtle trace of ego like: "I am untainted, I am pure, conscious, and free" will remain. If this state: "May I remain untainted, there is no agency in me" continues for a long time, this ego also will dissolve on its own, i.e., merge into its cause, Nature. Connection — In the previous verse it was stated that the person of perverted intellect who looks upon the pure Self as the doer does not see rightly. Who then is the one who sees rightly? This is described in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
In fact, the agency of the individual self is subject to the consent of Supreme Self; such being the case, if the 'individual self regards Itself as the agent,' It is of wicked or perverse mind. For, It does not perceive the agent as It really is, since It possesses an 'uncultivated understanding,' namely, an understanding which does not reveal the real state of affairs.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.13–18.17 jointly): Panca etc. upto na nibadhyate Conclusion :  the established end, because here a decision is arrived at.  Basis : the material object Destiny :  the good and  bad result  [of actions] previously accumulated.  These five viz., the basis etc., constitute the entire assembly of factors and hence they are the causes for each action.
 
But other [commentators give an etymology of]  adhisthana 'basis' to mean 'That by which all actions are governed'; and on that ground they believe that it denotes that action which exists in the intellect; which comes ot be due to the Rajas, and is being prone to transform itself into the pentad of (the mental dispositions viz.)  the content, the faith, the happiness, the desire to know and the aversion to know; which is referable by the term karma-yoga  (that which yokes man into activity); and which is described at times by the term prayatna 'effort'.
 
Agent :  the ascertainer characterised by the intellect.  Instrument :  [the personal instruments viz.] the mind, the eye etc., and also the external ones like sword etc.  Activity :  the activity of  upper life-breath, nether life-breath etc.  The effects of the righteous and unrighteous acts are indicated by the term Destiny.  All the dispositions located in the intellect are indicated by these two.  Still other commentators, however, take Basis to be the Absolute Lord.
 
Due to his  imperfect intellect :  because of his having indecisive  knowledge.  But he, who performs actions with the stability due to disappearance of th I-sense  (limited) and  [a stability] refined by hundreds of reasoning, as detailed earlier - he does not get the fetter, because he is a man of perfect intellect.  This is what is intended  [in the passage under study].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tatra is used for connecting with the topic under discussion. Tatra evam sati, this being the case, when actions are thus accomplished by the five causes mentioned above;-this portion has to be connected with 'perverted intellect' by way of causality [Actions are done by the body etc., but since a person thinks that the Self is the agent, therefore he is said to have a perverted intellect.]-yah, tu, anyone, an unenlightened person, who; pasyati, perceives; kevalam, the absolute, pure; atmanam, Self; as the kartaram, agent-thinking, 'I myself am the agent of the actions being done by them', as a conseence of imagining the Self as identified with them; why?-akrta-buddhitvat, owing to the imperfection of his intellect, owing to his intellect not having been refined by the instructions of Vedanta and the teachers, and by reasoning-.
Even the person who, believing in the Self as distinct from the body etc., looks upon the distinct [Ast. omits anyam (distinct).-Tr.], absolute Self as the agent, he, too, is surely of imperfect intellect.
Hence, owing to his having an imperfect intellect, sah, that man; na, does not; pasyati, perceive (properly) either the truth about the Self or about actions. This is the meaning. Therefore he is a durmatih, man of perverted intellect, in the sense that his intellect is contemptible, perverse, corrupted, and the cause of repeatedly undergoing births and deaths. He does not perceive even while seeing-like the man suffering from Timira seeing many moons, or like one thinking the moon to be moving when (actually) the clouds are moving, or like the one seated on some conveyance (e.g. palanin), thinking oneself to be moving when others (the bearers) are moving.
Who, again, is the man of right intellect who perceives correctly? This is being answered:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
If it is explained that the individual self is not included in the causes of action, then in the next sentence: "tatra evam sati", the word "kevalam" (alone) would be inappropriate. Because by the censure of one who regards the Self alone as the cause, it would appear that the Self has helpers as causes. To this he says: "kevalam...". The meaning is: the word "kevala" here does not mean "alone" (without helpers), but rather "actionless"; and its use is for the sake of establishing the censure. Why does the word "kevala" mean "actionless"? To this he says: "this...". It is declared in that very Ayasya-sruti.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
This being the case, when action has five causes, and when in reality the agency of the individual self is dependent on the permission of the Supreme Self who is the prompter of Nature and Spirit, he who, in that action, looks upon the absolute Self, i.e., himself alone, as the doer — he is of extremely perverted intellect. Because, due to uncultivated intellect, he does not see the doer as he really is.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He now states the result of describing the seat, etc. as the causes of action, which shows that the Self has no agency: "tatra...". This being the case, when in all the aforementioned actions there are the five causes like the seat, etc., and they are being performed by them, he who looks upon the Self — which is the illuminator of the entire insentient universe, of the nature of existence and manifestation, self-luminous supreme bliss, unsublatable, absolute, unattached, indifferent, non-agent, changeless, and non-dual — but in reality, due to ignorance, is reflected in the seat, etc. like the sun in water, and having imagined it as identical with that which it illuminates, just as when water moves the sun is said to move, thinks: "I alone am the doer of the action of the seat, etc.", thus looking upon the Self, which is actually the witness, as the doer and the locus of activity, and imagining it through ignorance like a snake in a rope, he, even though seeing in this manner, does not see the Self in truth. Because the superimposition is caused by ignorance of one's own nature, he, due to delusion, sees only what is opposite and not the truth. What is the reason for this? To this He says: "akṛtabuddhitvāt" (owing to uncultivated understanding). Because of not having discrimination generated by scriptures, the teachings of preceptors, and logical reasoning. Indeed, in the absence of direct realization of the truth of the rope, no one can sublate the delusion of the snake. Similarly, when the direct realization: "I am the truth, knowledge, infinite, non-agent, non-enjoyer, supreme bliss, immutable, non-dual Brahman" has not been generated by the scriptures, the teachings of preceptors, and logical reasoning, how can there be sublation of false knowledge and its effects? Why does he not generate such direct realization by approaching a teacher and deliberating on the Upanishadic texts? To this He says: "durmatiḥ" (of perverted intellect). He is one whose intellect is wicked, i.e., soiled by sin which is an obstacle to discrimination; therefore, due to impurity of intellect, being devoid of discrimination between the eternal and transient objects, and thus unfit for knowledge of Truth, imagining through ignorance the actionless Self as the doer, and the absolute Self as not absolute, he remains a transmigrating soul qualified for action, a wearer of the body, of uncultivated intellect, and due to pride of identity with the factors of action, is unable to renounce actions, and always experiences the undesirable, desirable, and mixed fruits of action in the cycle of birth and death. By this, even the logician (tarkika) who looks upon the Self as distinct from the body, etc., but as the doer alone, is explained as being of uncultivated intellect. Another commentator says: "The Self alone is not the doer, but when conjoined with the seat, etc., is indeed the doer in reality; he who looks upon the absolute Self as the doer is of perverted intellect, because of the use of the word 'kevalam'." That is incorrect. Because, for the Self which in reality is devoid of all activity and is unattached, conjunction with the seat, etc. is impossible. Its conjunction being illusory like the sun reflected in water, its agency also is of the same nature, and the seat, etc. are also illusory. The word "kevala", however, restates the naturally established unattached and non-dual nature of the Self, as the cause of perverted intellect in one who looks upon it as the doer; hence there is no defect.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
"What follows from that?" To this He replies: "tatra...". This being the case, when for all actions these five are the causes, he who looks upon the absolute Self, which is unconditioned and unattached, as the doer — he, being of uncultivated intellect due to abandoning the teachings of scriptures and preceptors, is of perverted intellect, and does not see rightly.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having thus stated the causality of the seat, etc. in all actions, He refers to the ignorant man's view of agency in the actionless Self, in: "tatra evam sati". This being the case, when all actions are performed by the five causes as mentioned, he who, due to uncultivated intellect, i.e., intellect not refined by the teachings of Vedanta and preceptors, and by reasoning, looks upon the absolute, pure, unassociated, actionless Self as the doer, thinking: "I alone am the doer of action being performed by the seat, etc. which are imagined as identical with the Self" — therefore he, of perverted intellect, does not see at all. Even the logician, etc. who holds that the Self is distinct from the body but looks upon the absolute, actionless, pure Self as the doer, he too, owing to uncultivated intellect, does not see the truth of either the Self or action. Therefore he is of perverted intellect (durmati), meaning his intellect is contemptible, perverse, corrupted, and the cause of repeatedly undergoing births and deaths. He, even though seeing, does not see. Just as a man with Timira sees many moons, or as one seated in a carriage sees himself running when others (horses) are running; so also, when the seat, etc. are the doers of activity, he who looks upon his own actionless Self residing in them as the doer, is of perverted intellect. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
"If so, even though there is causality of the five, the Self alone is the doer; then the contemplation of non-agency would indeed be of the nature of delusion." To preserve injunctions and prohibitions, agency is indeed difficult to abandon. Nor can it be said that agency independent of helpers is prohibited, because in the absence of such a possibility, its prohibition is improper. Indeed, no one thinks: "I perform action independently of body, senses, staff, wheel, etc." In this doubt, since the delusion of natural agency independent of another controller, and the pride of one having the delusion of body, etc. as the Self in action dependent on many that it has no other cause, must be removed, He says with that intent: "tatra evam sati". This is the idea: although the individual self has agency by its nature due to its being atomic, yet that also is not on its own, but is dependent only on the Supreme Self. This being the case, he who looks upon the absolute Self, i.e., himself alone as the independent doer, is of perverted intellect. Because of dependence on many like body, seat, etc., the word "kevalam" meaning independent is not contradictory. "akṛtabuddhitvāt" means because of not having accomplished knowledge of Truth. "he, of perverted intellect, does not see" means that due to loss of intellect, even though seeing, he does not see rightly. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Thus, having pointed them out, He specifies them: "adhisthanam...". The seat (adhishthana) is the body, which is so called because it is occupied as the basis or locus of the action desired to be performed; as also the doer (karta), which is the imagined enjoyer, i.e., the individual self who is the knot of the conscious and the insentient, and is composed of the attributes; as also the instrument (karanam) of various kinds, twelve in number, consisting of the organs of knowledge like ears, etc., the organs of action like hands, feet, etc., and the mind and intellect; and the distinct functions (cheshtah) which are of various kinds and are separate, such as prana, apana, etc.; destiny (daivam) is indeed here the presiding deities like the Sun, etc. of the eye, etc. which completes the five and is the fifth cause.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He states those causes: "adhisthanam...". The seat (adhishthana) is the body. The doer (karta) is the individual self who is the reflection of consciousness (chidabhasa). The instrument (karanam) is twelvefold, consisting of the organs of knowledge, the organs of action, the mind, and the intellect. The functions (cheshtah) are the functions of vital airs like prana, apana, etc. Destiny (daivam) is destiny (adrishtam) consisting of virtue and vice, and by the two words "and" (ca), the presiding deities like the Sun, etc. are also included. By contemplating this, the wise man remains happily free from the taint of action. The ignorant person also, contemplating: "these factors alone perform actions, but not the Self", gradually becomes purified. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the five factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things as they are.

 A foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a friend within and conducting his actions. Although the material causes are the place, the worker, the endeavor and the senses, the final cause is the Supreme, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should see not only the four material causes but the supreme efficient cause as well. One who does not see the Supreme thinks himself to be the doer.