Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
āḍhyo.abhijanavānasmi ko.anyo.asti sadṛśo mayā .
yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya ityajñānavimohitāḥ

Word Meanings:
आढ्यः - rich
अभिजनवान् - wellborn
अस्मि - I am
कः - who
अन्यः - else
अस्ति - is
सदृशः - equal
मया - to me
यक्ष्ये - will sacrifice
दास्यामि - will give
मोदिष्ये - will rejoice
इति - thus
अज्ञानविमोहिताः - deluded by ignorance.

Life Application:
'I am rich, well-born; who else is equal to me? I will sacrifice, give, rejoice'—thus deluded by ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
'I am rich and born in a noble family. Who else is equal to me? I shall perform sacrifices, I shall give alms, and I shall rejoice.' Thus they are deluded by ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
"I am rich and born in a noble family. Who else is equal to me? I shall perform sacrifices. I shall give (charity). I shall rejoice," thus deluded by ignorance.

आढ्यः rich? अभिजनवान् wellborn? अस्मि (I) am? कः who? अन्यः else? अस्ति is? सदृशः eal? मया to me? यक्ष्ये (I) will sacrifice? दास्यामि (I) will give? मोदिष्ये (I) will rejoice? इति thus? अज्ञानविमोहिताः deluded by ignorance.Commentary Kubera (the god of wealth) may be wealthy? but he cannot be compared with me. Even Vishnu Himself does not possess the wealth that I possess. In comparison with my illustrious family and the extent of my relations even Brahma is indeed of inferior descent. They are as nothing when compared with me. Who then is there in the whole world eal to meWellborn Born in a family learned in the scriptures for seven generations. None is eal to me in this respect. I will do may sacrificial rites to get name and fame. None is eal to me in this respect also. I will give money and presents to those who entertain me with dance? music and songs in praise of me. None is eal to me in charity (giving) also. I will indulge in eating? drinking and women.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
I am rich, I am well-bred; who is there to compare with me? I will sacrifice, I will give, I will pay - and I will enjoy. Thus blinded by Ignorance,

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
'I am rich and well-bred; who is there to compare with me? I will sacrifice, I will give, I will pay - and I will enjoy.' Thus blinded by Ignorance.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that the demoniac person evaluates himself and the world through deluded vision. Swollen with pride, he considers everyone else insignificant. He wants to control even the gods through rituals and buy the world through charity, in order to be worshiped and then enjoy sensual pleasures. These are the delusions of a mentally disturbed person who is stuck deep in the abyss of ignorance.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
'I am rich;  I am of of noble birth; who else is eal ot me ?  I shall  perform sacrifices;  I shall give gifts; and I shall rejoice' - deluded by these wrong ideas;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
' I am wealthy and high-born; who else is eal to me?  I shall sacrifice, I shall give alms, I shall rejoice.' Thus they think, deluded byignorance.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
'I am rich and high-born; who else is there similar to me? I shall perform sacrifices; I shall give, I shall rejoice,'-thus they are diversely deluded by non-discrimination.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that they think nobody is equal to them in terms of wealth, learning, or family. They perform sacrifices and charities not out of devotion, but to mock or defeat others, showing how deeply they are deluded.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
'I am rich and well-born; who is there to compare with me? I will perform sacrifices, I will give alms, and I will rejoice.' Thus they remain deluded by ignorance.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that Asuri people pride themselves on their lineage and wealth. They perform grand sacrifices and charities only for name and fame (dambha), and to see their names in newspapers or carved on temple walls. They want to indulge in all worldly comforts and remain in the illusion of being the most successful people, fully trapped in the darkness of ignorance.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'I am rich by myself. Who else is there in this world like me gaining all glory with his own ability?  I myself shall sacrifice, I shall give alms and I shall rejoice' - thus they think deluded by ignorance, viz., deluded by ignorance that they are themselves capable of offering sacrifices, gifts etc., unaided by the grace of God.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.13–16.16 jointly): Idam adya etc. upto asucau.  Endowed with many thoughts etc.  For, they do not have any conviction. Into the hell and what is foul :  in the [hell] Avici and the  like and in the regular succession of  birth and death.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Adhyah, I am rich in wealth; abhi-janavan, high-born in respect of my lineage; my seven generations are endowed with Vedic learnig etc. From that point of view also there is none eal to me. Kah anyah, who else; asti, is there; sadrsah, similar; maya, to me? Besides, yaksye, I shall perform sacrifices; in respect of sacrifices also I shall defeat others. Dasyami, I shall give-to actors and others; modisye, I shall rejoice, and I shall derive intense joy. Iti, thus; are they ajnana-vimohitah, diversely deluded by non-discrimination, subject to various indiscrimination.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that Asuri people pride themselves on their wealth and noble lineage. They perform sacrifices to defeat others' reputation and give charity to praise-singers or actors, completely deluded by non-discrimination.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that they perform sacrifices and charities not out of piety, but only to obtain high status and reputation in society, deluded by false concepts.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that Asuri individuals boast of their lineage and wealth. They perform sacrifices to insult others and give charity to show off, trapped in a continuous loop of ignorance.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that their performance of sacrifices and charity is done with vanity and ostentation, purely for prestige and self-enjoyment, completely ignoring God's grace.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that Asuri people perform rituals for prestige, and give charity to corrupt people who flatter them. They seek pleasure, but remain trapped in the illusion of ignorance.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'adhyah' means rich. Trapped in delusion, they believe that physical family and material wealth make them supreme.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Whatever I perform by way of sacrifices, austerities, or charitable activities, I do to this end and only this and am united to the manner in which they act.

There is no purport for this verse