Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
asaktabuddhiḥ sarvatra jitātmā vigataspṛhaḥ .
naiṣkarmyasiddhiṃ paramāṃ saṃnyāsenādhigacchati

Word Meanings:
असक्तबुद्धिः - whose intellect is unattached
सर्वत्र - everywhere
जितात्मा - who has subdued his
विगतस्पृहः - whose desire has fled
नैष्कर्म्यसिद्धिम् - the perfection consisting in
परमाम् - the supreme
संन्यासेन - by renunciaion
अधिगच्छति - attains.

Life Application:
Intellect unattached everywhere, self-controlled, desires gone, one reaches supreme state of freedom from action through renunciation.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He whose intellect is unattached everywhere, who has controlled his mind, and from whom desires have vanished, attains through renunciation the supreme state of freedom from action.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He whose intellect is unattached everywhere, who has subdued his self, from whom desire has fled,  he by renunciation, attains the supreme state of freedom from action.

असक्तबुद्धिः whose intellect is unattached? सर्वत्र eveywhere? जितात्मा who has subdued his self? विगतस्पृहः whose desire has fled? नैष्कर्म्यसिद्धिम् the perfection consisting in freedom from action? परमाम् the supreme? संन्यासेन by renunciaion? अधिगच्छति (he) attains.Commentary The mind of one who is free from attachment to wife? son? body and property? who has controlled his senses and the mind? who has no desire for the body? for life and for sensual pleasure? turns inwards towards God or the immortal Self. It is not attracted by the sensual objects of the world. It is filled with dispassion and discrimination.He gradually gets himself established in his own Self which is of the nature of ExistenceKnowledgeBliss. Such a person who has knowledge of the Self attains to the highest perfection? to pefect freedom from action by renunciation.Ignorance is destroyed by the attainment of the knowledge of the Self. There is cessation of activity. One may perform actions for the solidarity of the world and yet he will not be bound by actions as he has attained absolute freedom from action through the knowledge of the Self. The fire of knowledge has burnt the fruitbearing effects of Karmas or actions. He has no idea of agency as he is absolutely free from egoism? as he has identified himself with the Supreme Being.Naishkarmya siddhi may also mean the attainment of the state of Naishkarmya. In this exalted? magnanimous? ineffable state of divine splendour and glory? one remains as the actionless Self. This is the state of immediate liberation of the Vedantins (Kaivalya Moksha or Sadyomukti). This marvellous state is attained by renunciation or right knowledge or by the renunciation of all actions brought about by the attainment of the knowledge of the Self. Mentally renouncing all actions and selfcontrolled? the embodied one rests happily in the ninegated? city? neither acting nor causing others to act. (Cf.V.13)Now the Lord teaches in the next verse how a man who? having attained perfection as described above in verse 46? by doing his duty in the service of the Lord can attain perfect freedom from action. He gets discrimination? practises constant meditation and rests in the knowledge of the immutable Self.,(Cf.III.4and19)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
He whose mind is entirely detached, who has conquered himself, whose desires have vanished, by his renunciation reaches that stage of perfect freedom where action completes itself and leaves no seed.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
He whose intellect is unattached everywhere, who has conquered his lower self, and from whom desires have vanished, attains through Sannyasa the supreme state of actionlessness (Naishkarmya-siddhi). Commentary: Naishkarmya-siddhi is the state of Self-realization, wherein ignorance, desires, thoughts, and egoistic actions cease. Sannyasa here does not mean escaping from one's duties, but rather renouncing the identification with the body, mind, and intellect, and realizing one's true nature as the actionless Self. This state of non-agency is the highest spiritual perfection.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
He, whose mind entertains no attachment to anything, who is self-conered and is free from craving-he attains by means of renunciation the supreme success of actionlessness.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He whose understanding is on all sides unattached, whose self is conered, who is free from desires - he attains by renunciation the supreme perfection transcending all activity.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
He whose intellect remains unattached to everything, who has conered his internal organs and is desireless, attains through monasticism the supreme perfection consisting in the state of one free from duties.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
By Naishkarmya-siddhi is meant the yoga-siddhi which yields the fruit of actionlessness.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He whose intellect is unattached, who is self-controlled, and whose thirst for life and enjoyments is gone, attains through right knowledge (Sannyasa) the supreme perfection of remaining established in the actionless Self.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He whose intellect is unattached everywhere, who has controlled his body and mind, and who is free from all cravings, attains through Samkhya Yoga the supreme perfection of actionlessness.

Commentary: For a seeker to be qualified for Samkhya Yoga, three qualities are essential: complete detachment from all objects, control over the physical body, and freedom from even the subtlest desire for life-sustaining necessities. By dedicating himself to this path of knowledge, the seeker realizes his non-association with the actions of nature and rests in the actionless Supreme Self.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
He whose understanding is, on all sides, without attachments, concerning fruits etc., whose 'self is conered,' i.e., who has conered his mind; who, by contemplating on the agency of the Supreme Person, is free from the habit of attributing agency to the self; and who is thus eipped with Sannyasa which has been positively determined to be the same as Tyaga - such a man, performing actions, attains supreme perfection which is free from all activities. The meaning is that he attains devotion to Dhyana which is the consummation of even Jnana Yoga; he attains Dhyana Yoga (Yoga of meditation) consisting in the complete cessation of sensory activity, which is going to be described hereafter.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Asakta-buddhih, he whose intellect, the internal organ, remains unattached; sarvatra, to everything, with regard to son, wife and others who are the cuases of attachment; jitatma, who has conered his internal organs; and vigata-sprhah, who is desireless, whose thirst for his body, life and objects of enjoyment have been eradicated;-he who is such a knower of the Self, adhigaccahti, attains; sannyasena, through monasticism, through perfect knowledge or through renunciation of all actions preceded by this knowledge; the paramam, supreme, most excellent; naiskarmya-siddhim, perfection consisting in the state of one free from duties.
One is said to be free from duties from whom duties have daparted as a result of realizing that the actionless Brahman is his Self; his state is naiskarmyam. That siddhi (perfection) which is this naiskarmya is naiskarmya-siddhi. Or, this phrase means 'achievement of naiskarmya', i.e., achievement of the state of remaining established in one's own real nature as the actionless Self-which is different from the success arising from Karma (-yoga), and is of the form of being established in the state of immediate Liberation. Accordingly has it been said, '৷৷.having given up all actions mentally,৷৷.without doing or causing (others) to do anything at all' (5.13).
The stages through which one who has attained success-which has the aforesaid characteristics and which arises from the performance of one's own duties mentioned earlier as worship of God-, and in whom has arisen discriminative knowledge, achieves perfection-in the form of exclusive adherence to Knowledge of the Self and consisting in the state of one free from duties-have to be stated. With this is view the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
By Naishkarmya-siddhi is meant the perfection of the mind that makes it fit for actionlessness (meditation).

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
By having a mind unattached to the fruits of actions, subduing the self, and being free from desires, one attains the supreme state of actionlessness through renunciation.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He whose intellect is unattached to family, whose mind is controlled, and who is free from all cravings for bodily life and enjoyment, attains the supreme Naishkarmya-siddhi (Self-knowledge) through Sannyasa (renunciation of all scriptural duties).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He whose intellect is unattached, who is free from egoism, and who is desireless of fruits, attains through the renunciation of attachment and fruits the supreme state of actionlessness (Self-realization).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He whose understanding is unattached to family, who has conquered his mind, and who is free from desire for body and pleasure, attains through perfect knowledge (Sannyasa) the supreme perfection of remaining established in the actionless Self.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
He whose intellect is unattached to fruits, who has conquered his mind, and who is free from the sense of agency, attains through Sannyasa (Tyaga) the supreme state of meditation (Naishkarmya-siddhi) where all sensory activities cease.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He whose intellect is unattached, who is self-conquered, and who is free from all cravings, attains through renunciation the supreme state of actionlessness.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He whose intellect is unattached, whose mind is conquered, and who is free from desires, attains through the renunciation of actions the supreme state of remaining as the actionless Self.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who is self-controlled and unattached and who disregards all material enjoyments can obtain, by practice of renunciation, the highest perfect stage of freedom from reaction.

 Real renunciation means that one should always think himself part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and therefore think that he has no right to enjoy the results of his work. Since he is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, the results of his work must be enjoyed by the Supreme Lord. This is actually Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The person acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is really a sannyāsī, one in the renounced order of life. By such a mentality, one is satisfied because he is actually acting for the Supreme. Thus he is not attached to anything material; he becomes accustomed to not taking pleasure in anything beyond the transcendental happiness derived from the service of the Lord. A sannyāsī is supposed to be free from the reactions of his past activities, but a person who is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness automatically attains this perfection without even accepting the so-called order of renunciation. This state of mind is called yogārūḍha, or the perfectional stage of yoga. As confirmed in the Third Chapter, yas tv ātma-ratir eva syāt: one who is satisfied in himself has no fear of any kind of reaction from his activity.