Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi na śocati na kāṅkṣati .
śubhāśubhaparityāgī bhaktimānyaḥ sa me priyaḥ

Word Meanings:
यः - who
न - not
हृष्यति - rejoices
न - not
द्वेष्टि - hates
न - not
शोचति - grieves
न - not
काङ्क्षति - desires
शुभाशुभपरित्यागी - renouncing good and evil
भक्तिमान् - full of devotion
यः - who
सः - he
मे - to Me
प्रियः - dear.

Life Application:
Neither rejoice excessively nor hate, neither grieve nor crave, abandoning both good and evil outcomes with devotion.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He who neither rejoices nor hates, neither grieves nor desires, and who renounces both the auspicious and the inauspicious, that devotee is dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He who neither rejoices, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires, renouncing good and evil, and who is full of devotion, is dear to Me.

यः who? न not? हृष्यति rejoices? न not? द्वेष्टि hates? न not? शोचति grieves? न not? काङ्क्षति desires? शुभाशुभपरित्यागी renouncing good and evil? भक्तिमान् full of devotion? यः who? सः he? मे to Me? प्रियः dear.Commentary What is described in verse 13 is dealt with at length in this.He does not rejoice when he attains the desirable objects. He does not hate when he gets the undesirable objects. He does not grieve when he parts with his beloved objects. He does not desire the unattained.Subhasubhaparityagi Here is a further description of Sarvarambhaparityagi of verse 16. He who has renounced good and evil actions which produce pleasure and pain is a devotee of the Lord.Such a devotee or knower of Brahman? who is My own Self? is dear to Me. (Cf.VII.17IX.29)

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
He who is beyond joy and hate, who neither laments nor desires, to whom good and evil fortunes are the same, such a one is My beloved.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
That man is called a supreme devotee who, having renounced his identification with the world and the non-Self tools of mind and intellect, has obtained a firm establishment in the blissful Self. Therefore, it is natural that the experiences of pleasure and pain arising from the non-Self world can neither attract him in any way nor agitate him. This is what is explained in this verse. An ordinary man does not see all things in the world as they are. To him, some object is dear, while another is unpleasant. Thereafter, he desires or wishes for the dear object and hates the unpleasant one. After this, a third pair of opposites arises, namely, action and abstention, that is, he makes an effort to acquire the desired object and to discard the hated object. As a result, he rejoices when he obtains the desired object, otherwise he grieves. The absence of all these modifications and reactions is described here in the wise devotee. The reason for this is that, being established in his supreme blissful nature, he does not imagine pleasure and pain in external false objects and thereby does not have attachment or aversion to them. In the absence of the pair of opposites of attachment and aversion, joy and grief automatically cease to exist. That devotee does not look at the world from the perspective of his own imagination but sees it in its true reality.

Renouncer of Good and Evil (Subhabhasubhaparityagi): When a man does not know his blissful nature, he keeps searching for happiness and peace in the external world. In that state, due to his attachment and aversion, he performs both auspicious and inauspicious (meritorious and sinful) actions to obtain objects. However, since there is no attachment and aversion in the mind of the devotee, he becomes free from both the auspicious and the inauspicious. Thus, we see that all the words used in the above verse have a special deep meaning; otherwise, by accepting only the literal meaning, it would seem that the wise devotee is like a corpse or just a stone, because he neither desires nor hates, neither rejoices nor becomes unhappy - that is, he lies dead. This verse is a very powerful example of the fact that the literal meaning of the words of the scriptures does not clarify their inner core or purpose. Therefore, it becomes necessary to consider their implied meaning. A devotee endowed with the qualities described in this verse is dear to the Lord. This verse is the fourth part of the present section, in which six more characteristics of the wise devotee are mentioned. Thus, so far twenty-six qualities have been described, which are the natural characteristics of a devotee.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
He, who neither delights no hates, nor grieves, nor craves; who has renounced both the good and the bad results [of actions] and is full of devotion [to Me]-he is dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who rejoices not, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires, who renounces good and evil, who is full of devotion to me - dear to me is such 
a devotee.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
He who does not rejoice, does not fret, does not lament, does not hanker; who gives up good and bad, who is filled with devotion-he is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Pointing out that being free from aversion, joy, etc., is also a characteristic of a wise person (Jnani), he says—'Furthermore' (Kinceti). Since the renunciation of actions performed with desire (kamya-karma) has already been stated by the term 'renouncer of all undertakings' (sarvarambha-parityagi), he qualifies it in respect of other than the prescribed actions by specifying 'good and evil' (subhasubha-iti).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He who is never rejoiced, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires, and who has renounced attachment and aversion in good and evil actions, that devotee is dear to Me.

Commentary: 'yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi na śocati na kāṅkṣati' — The main modifications (vikalas/distortions) are four: (1) attachment (raga), (2) aversion (dvesha), (3) joy (harsha), and (4) grief (shoka). These four distortions do not exist in a perfected devotee. His experience is that the world is being separated from him at every moment, and he is never separated from God. There never was, is not, will not, and can never be any association with the world. Therefore, the world has no independent existence. After experiencing this reality (and having no connection with insentience), the devotee's experience of his eternally established relationship with God remains unshakable. For this reason, his inner self is completely free from distortions like attachment and aversion. Upon realizing God, these distortions are completely eliminated.

Even in the stage of practice (sadhana), as the practitioner progresses in his practice, attachment and aversion keep decreasing. That which decreases is also bound to perish. Therefore, when distortions begin to decrease in the stage of practice itself, it can easily be inferred that in the state of perfection (siddhavastha), these distortions do not remain in the devotee; they are completely eliminated.

Joy and grief are both consequences of attachment and aversion. One feels 'joy' upon association with that for which one has attachment, and upon separation from that for which one has aversion. On the contrary, one feels 'grief' upon separation or fear of separation from that for which one has attachment, and upon association or fear of association with that for which one has aversion. Since there is a absolute absence of attachment and aversion in a perfected devotee, a state of equanimity naturally and constantly persists. Therefore, he is completely free from distortions.

Just as during the night, in darkness, there is a desire to light a lamp; lighting the lamp brings joy, there is aversion or anger towards the one who blows out the lamp, and there is anxiety about how the lamp should be lit again. All these four things happen because it is night. But if the midday sun is shining, there is no desire to light a lamp, no joy in lighting a lamp, no aversion or anger towards the one who blows out the lamp, and (due to the absence of darkness) no anxiety about the lack of light. Similarly, by turning away from God and towards the world, there arises a desire to obtain favorable objects and circumstances for physical maintenance and pleasure. Upon getting these, there is joy; there is aversion or anger towards the one who obstructs their acquisition; and on not getting them, there is anxiety as to 'how to get them'. But one who has attained God (like the midday sun) never retains these distortions. He becomes fully satisfied (purnakama). Therefore, he has no need for the world.

'Subhasubhaparityagi' — By performing auspicious actions only after becoming free from possessiveness, attachment, and desire for results, the devotee's actions become 'inaction' (akarma). Therefore, the devotee is said to be a renouncer of even auspicious actions. Due to the absolute absence of attachment and aversion, inauspicious actions never happen through him. Desire, possessiveness, and attachment are the primary causes for the occurrence of inauspicious actions, and these are completely absent in the devotee. Therefore, he is called a renouncer of inauspicious actions as well. The devotee does not have attachment towards auspicious actions and does not have aversion towards inauspicious actions. By him, the natural scripturally ordained auspicious actions are performed and inauspicious (forbidden and desire-driven) actions are renounced, but not out of attachment or aversion. The one who completely renounces attachment and aversion is the true renouncer.

Actions do not bind a man; rather, attachment and aversion in actions bind him. Since all the actions of a devotee are free from attachment and aversion, he is a renouncer of all auspicious and inauspicious actions.

The term 'Subhasubhaparityagi' can also mean the renouncer of the fruits of auspicious and inauspicious actions. However, the terms 'na hrsyati na dvesti na socati na kanksati' in the first half of this verse are also related to the renunciation of the fruits of auspicious (favorable) and inauspicious (unfavorable) actions. Therefore, if we take 'Subhasubhaparityagi' to mean the renouncer of the fruits of auspicious and inauspicious actions, it would lead to the defect of tautology (repetition). Therefore, the meaning of this term should be taken only as the renouncer of attachment and aversion in auspicious and inauspicious actions.

'bhaktimānyaḥ sa me priyaḥ' — The devotee has intense love for God. By him, contemplation, remembrance, and worship of God happen spontaneously and naturally. Such a devotee is called 'bhaktiman' here. The devotee has one-pointed love for God, and therefore he is dear to God.

Connection: Now, in the next two verses, the fifth and final section containing ten characteristics of a perfected devotee is stated.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
He who does not 'rejoice', i.e., that Karma Yogin, who, on obtaining things which cause joy to man, does not rejoice; who does not 'hate', does not hate on obtaining anything undesriable; who is not 'grieved' by common sorrows which cause grief among men, as the loss of wife, son, fortune etc.; who 'does not desire' anything like wife, son, fortune etc.; not already acired by him; who 'renounces good and evil,' i.e., who renounces both merit and demerit because, like demert, merit also causes bondage, there being no difference between them in this respect - he who is like this and devoted to Me is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 12.15–12.20 jointly): Yasmat  etc. upto  Me priyah.   One who has no fixed thought :  One who has no resolution,  [in his mundane life] like  'This alone must be done by me'.  He, who enjoys, with contentment, both pleasure and pain as they come, and has his mind completely absorbed in Supreme Lord - that person happily (or easily)  attains the Supreme Isolation (Emancipation)

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yah, he who; na hrsyati, does not rejoice on getting a coveted object; na dvesti, does not fret on getting an undesirable object; na socati, does not lament on the loss of a dear one; and na kanksati, does not hanker after an object not acired; subha-asubha-parityogi, who gives up good and bad, who is apt to give up good and bad actions; bhaktiman, who is full of devotion-he is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Furthermore, he who neither rejoices nor hates. Seeing the happiness or sorrow of others, he does not grieve like ordinary people (prakrita) even upon the loss of wealth etc. Nor does he desire it for his own enjoyment, thinking that the Lord alone is the ruler, He arranges everything and will do so according to His own will, and thus he does not pray or worry about it. He who renounces both good and evil, and is full of devotion, is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He who, etc. Furthermore, he explains 'equanimous in pleasure and pain' by saying—he who does not rejoice on obtaining the desirable, does not hate on obtaining the undesirable, does not grieve on the separation of the attained desirable, does not desire the association of the unattained desirable. He explains 'renouncer of all undertakings' by saying—he who has the nature of renouncing both good and evil actions, which are the causes of pleasure and pain, is a renouncer of good and evil. Such a devotee is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore, he who does not rejoice on obtaining the pleasant, does not hate on obtaining the unpleasant, does not grieve when the desired object is destroyed, does not desire an unattained object; and whose nature is to renounce both good and evil, i.e., merit and sin—he who, being thus, is devoted to Me, is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Furthermore, with the intention that being free from joy etc., is also an attribute of the knower of truth, he says—'He who' (Yah iti). As for the interpretation that this very verse is explained by three verses, that is to be rejected. Because when non-redundancy is possible according to the Bhashya, it is unjust to assume a relationship of commentary and commented. He who does not rejoice, i.e., does not obtain joy, on getting the desirable. He does not hate, i.e., does not feel aversion, on getting the undesirable. In 'adveshta sarvabhutanam' (12.13), a natural general absence of aversion towards all beings was stated; but here, the absence of specific aversion in response to obtaining the undesirable is stated, hence there is no redundancy. He does not grieve, i.e., does not accept mental affliction, on the separation of the dear. And he does not desire the unattained. He whose nature is to renounce good and bad actions, i.e., merit and sin. And by 'sarvarambha-parityagi', so that there is no limitation of the word 'all' to mean the renunciation of all undertakings other than the daily, occasional and desire-driven actions prescribed in the Vedas, it is said 'subhasubha-parityagi'. So that there is no limitation of the word 'all' to mean the renunciation of all undertakings other than the daily, occasional and desire-driven actions prescribed in the Vedas, it is said 'subhasubha-parityagi'. He who is full of devotion is dear to Me.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Now, by the verse 'He who does not rejoice', the absence of grief, joy, etc. even towards pleasant and unpleasant things that come by chance, the freedom from desire even towards unobtained things other than those forbidden, and the renunciation of their causes are being stated. By the phrase 'which causes joy to men', it is meant that whereas previously (in 12.15) by 'joy and impatience' (harsha-amarsha) joy etc. caused by specific persons was prohibited, here the joy etc. is caused by the gain of material objects. By the word 'Karma Yogin' used to explain the word 'He who' (yah), the cause of the absence of joy is indicated. The idea is that he is free from desire for anything other than the Self. To show the distinction from what was said in 'He who does not hate any being' (12.13), he says 'on obtaining anything undesirable'. Since the absence of joy, aversion, grief, etc. in the absence of their causes is common to all people, the mention of their respective causes is to show that his special prescribed quality is to remain without modification even when the cause of modification is present. As the Mahabharata says, 'Even if Mithila is burning, nothing of mine is burnt.' Indeed, sin (demerit) is that which causes undesirable results, as known from the scriptures. And the Shruti, saying 'neither good deeds nor bad deeds' and concluding with 'all sins turn back from this' (Chandogya Upanishad 8.4.1), states that even good deeds (merit) possess the nature of sin (as they cause bondage).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Furthermore—'He who' (Yo na iti). He who does not rejoice on obtaining worldly pleasant things, and similarly does not hate on obtaining the unpleasant, and also does not grieve when things meant for service (seva) are destroyed, nor desires them; who abandons both good and bad, which are in the form of heaven and hell. The meaning is that knowing the Lord's will in everything, he conducts himself as if it were a divine play (lila). Such a devotee who is endowed with devotion is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He explains this very verse with three verses—'He who' (Yo na iti). He does not rejoice when the desirable is obtained. He does not hate when the undesirable is obtained. He does not grieve when the desirable is separated. Because of being without expectations, he does not desire association with the desirable or avoidance of the undesirable. Good is auspiciousness or merit, and bad is inauspiciousness or sin; he whose nature is to renounce both is a renouncer of good and bad. By this, purity (shuchitvam) is explained. Devoted (bhaktiman) means one who is constantly engaged in devotion, which signifies being prompt (dakshah).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who neither rejoices nor grieves, who neither laments nor desires, and who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things – such a devotee is very dear to Me.

 A pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and loss, nor is he very much anxious to get a son or disciple, nor is he distressed by not getting them. If he loses anything which is very dear to him, he does not lament. Similarly, if he does not get what he desires, he is not distressed. He is transcendental in the face of all kinds of auspicious, inauspicious and sinful activities. He is prepared to accept all kinds of risks for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of his devotional service. Such a devotee is very dear to Kṛṣṇa.