Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
duḥkhamityeva yatkarma kāyakleśabhayāttyajet .
sa kṛtvā rājasaṃ tyāgaṃ naiva tyāgaphalaṃ labhet

Word Meanings:
दुःखम् - painful
इति - thus
एव - even
यत् - which
कर्म - action
कायक्लेशभयात् - from fear of bodily
त्यजेत् - abandons
सः - he
कृत्वा - performing
राजसम् - Rajasic
त्यागम् - abandonment
न - not
एव - even
त्यागफलम् - the fruit of abandonment
लभेत् - obtains.

Life Application:
Abandoning action from fear of physical discomfort, saying 'it is painful'—that is Rajasic, winning no fruit.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The person who abandons action, considering it painful out of fear of physical suffering, by performing that Rajasic abandonment, never obtains the fruit of abandonment.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He who abandons action on account of the fear of bodily trouble (because it is painful), does not obtain the merit of renunciation by doing such Rajasic renunciation.

दुःखम् (it is) painful? इति thus? एव even? यत् which? कर्म action? कायक्लेशभयात् from fear of bodily trouble? त्यजेत् abandons? सः he? कृत्वा performing? राजसम् Rajasic? त्यागम् abandonment? न not? एव even? त्यागफलम् the fruit of abandonment? लभेत् obtains.Commentary Phalam Fruit or reward Moksha or emancipation which is the reward of renunciation of all actions accompanied with wisdom.Determination and persistence are reired for the performance of religious duties and actions. One may begin action but may relinish it before it is completed on account of some difficulties or physical suffering. What then is Sattvic renunciation The Lord says --

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
To avoid an action through fear of physical suffering, because it is likely to be painful, is to act from passion, and the benefit of renunciation will not follow.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
If a person abandons his obligatory duty, considering it painful out of fear of bodily exertion, his abandonment will be called Rajasic. This implies that if the obligatory duties were not painful and tiring, a person of Rajasic nature would be ready to perform them; but he who, despite being an active man, cannot sacrifice his personal comforts and conveniences, can never be called a noble and courageous person. Such actions do not receive any special reward. The Lord indeed says that he does not obtain any fruit of his abandonment. In fact, the performance of one's duties is itself the greatest abandonment, and it becomes even more noble particularly when a person has to sacrifice his physical comforts and conveniences. Arjuna himself, hesitating to fight, was turning away from his duty. Thus, his abandonment could only be said to belong to the Rajasic category. True abandonment always leads us to a vaster realm of self-expression, where we can experience a superior, divine bliss. Only through abandonment does a bud blossom into a flower, and that flower, by abandoning its soft petals and charming fragrance, attains the rich status of a fruit.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
He who would, out of fear of bodily exertion, relinish an action, just because it is painful-that person, having [thus] made relinishment, an act of the Rajas (Strand), would not at all gain the fruit of [that] relinishment.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who renounces acts as painful from fear of bodily suffering, performs a Rajasika abandonment; he does not gain the fruit of abandonment.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Whatever action one may relinish merely as being painful, from fear of physical suffering, he, having resorted to renunciation based on rajas, will surely not acire the fruits of renunciation.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
For this reason also, the abandonment of daily duties is not possible for an ignorant person; this he states with: "kiñca...". Objection: "But even without delusion, one abandons painful action out of fear of bodily suffering. For the instruments produce action and get fatigued, and thus that abandonment is not properly called Tamasic." To this he says: "duḥkhamityeva...". Thinking that whatever action is of the nature of pain and impossible to accomplish, one turns away from it and abandons it out of fear of bodily and sensory suffering; he, by abandoning that and performing abandonment caused by Rajas, does not obtain the fruit of abandonment, namely Liberation; but on the contrary, by that very Rajasic abandonment performed, he goes to hell corresponding to it; this He states with: "duḥkhamityeva..." etc.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Whatever action there is, it is only of the nature of pain — understanding thus, if anyone abandons it out of fear of bodily suffering, he, even by performing Rajasic abandonment, does not obtain the fruit of abandonment.

Commentary — duḥkhamityeva yatkarma — In performing scriptural obligatory actions like sacrifice, charity, etc., one has only to experience pain, and what else is there in them? Because to perform those actions, one has to bind oneself to many rules and also incur expenses — thus, a Rajasic person sees only pain and suffering in those actions. The reason for seeing pain is that they have no faith or belief in the next world, in the scriptures, in the scripturally ordained actions, and in the consequences of those actions.
kāyakleśabhayāttyajet — A Rajasic person experiences suffering, i.e., physical strain, in his body by walking in accordance with scriptural decorum and social limits. A Rajasic person experiences dependence and pain in performing the duties of his class, station in life, etc., and in obeying the commands of parents, teacher, employer, etc., while he experiences independence and pleasure in violating their commands and doing whatever he pleases. The thoughts of Rajasic people are like this: "There is no comfort in a householder's life; wife, children, etc., are not favorable to us, or all family members have died and no one is left to work at home, and I have to undergo trouble myself; therefore, if I become a monk, I will live comfortably, food, clothes, etc., will all be obtained for free, and I will not have to work hard; or if I could get some government job where I have to do less work and get money easily, and even if I don't work, no one can fire me from that job, and if I leave the job, I will keep getting pension, etc." Due to such thoughts, they do not like doing household work and they abandon it.
Here, a doubt arises: among the means to attain knowledge, it is said to repeatedly contemplate pain and defects (Gita 13.8), and here, abandoning actions seeing pain in them is called Rajasic abandonment, i.e., abandonment of actions is prohibited — there seems to be a contradiction between these two statements. The solution is that in reality, there is no contradiction between the two; rather, their scopes are different. There (in Gita 13.8), it is about seeing pain and defects in sense pleasures (bhogas), and here it is about seeing pain in obligatory duties. Therefore, there the subject is the abandonment of sense pleasures, and here the subject is the abandonment of duties. Sense pleasures should indeed be abandoned, but duties should never be abandoned. The reason is that by repeatedly seeing pain and defects in those pleasures in which there is an idea of happiness and quality, dispassion (vairagya) towards pleasures will arise, which will lead to the attainment of the Supreme Self; but by abandoning those actions seeing pain in obligatory duties, one will always have to suffer dependence and pain — "this world is bound by action other than that performed for sacrifice" (Gita 3.9). The implication is that seeing pain and defects in pleasures will destroy attachment to pleasures, which leads to welfare; and seeing pain in duty will lead to abandonment of duty, which leads to fall.
In abandoning duties, there are indeed two divisions — Rajasic and Tamasic, but in their outcome (laziness, negligence, excessive sleep, etc.), both become one, i.e., in outcome, both become Tamasic, the result of which is descent — "those in the mode of ignorance go downwards" (Gita 14.18).
Another doubt may be: if someone develops dispassion by listening to spiritual association (satsang), stories of the Lord, and the character of devotees, he also abandons necessary duties to attain the Lord and engages solely in worship of God. Therefore, should his abandonment of duties be called Rajasic? It is not so. One who, leaving worldly actions, engages in worship, his abandonment cannot be Rajasic or Tamasic. Because to attain God is the goal of human life; therefore, abandoning duties for the accomplishment of that goal is not in fact the abandonment of duty, but performing the real duty. While performing that real duty, defects like laziness, negligence, etc., cannot arise because his interest lies in God. But in those who perform Rajasic and Tamasic abandonment, defects like laziness, negligence, etc., will certainly arise because their interest lies in pleasures.
sa kṛtvā rājasaṃ tyāgaṃ naiva tyāgaphalaṃ labhet — The fruit of abandonment is peace. A Rajasic person, even after abandoning, does not obtain the fruit of abandonment (peace). The reason is that the abandonment he has performed is only for his own pleasure and comfort. Such abandonment is performed even by animals and birds. By abandoning auspicious actions for one's own pleasure and comfort, a Rajasic person does not get peace; instead, he has to suffer the consequence of abandoning auspicious actions as punishment.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Although actions constitute the indirect menas for release, yet they produce mental depression, since they can be done only by collecting materials involving painful effort and since they cause bodily strain on account of their reiring strenuous exertion. If, on account of such fear, one decides that the practice of knowledge alone should be tried for perfection in Yoga, and abandons actions like the great sacrifices applicable to one's station in life, he practises renunciation rooted in Rajas. Since that is not the meaning of the Sastras, one cannot win the fruit of renunciation in the form of the rise of knowledge. So it will be shown further one:  'That reason by which one erroneously knows, O Arjuna, is Rajasika' (18.31). In fact, actions do not directly cause purity of the mind but indirectly by winning the grace of God.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.4–18.11 jointly): Niscayam etc.  upto abhidhiyate.  The conclusion here is  this :  Due to the manifoldness of the nature of the Strands, that have been defined earlier, the act of relinishment itself is performed with a certain mental disposition which is a modification of the Sattva, the Rajas and the Tamas (the Strands).  Because it reflects  (is contaminated by)  the nature of the person having the same (the said mental dispositon),  what is called the real (unalloyed)  relinishment is the performance of the actions  by the knowers of the Supreme Brahman by giving up desire to achieve fruits and by avoiding the craving and hatred on account of their eanimity to [the pairs of opposites like]  success and failure etc.  That is why [the Bhagavat] says :  'By the act of relinishment born of the Rajas or of the Tamas  (Strands), no connection with the fruit  [of relinishment] is attained'.  However, for an act of relinishing, born of the Sattva (Strand), there is the fruit in the form of honouring the purport of the scriptures.  The application of the term  'relinishment'  stands to reason, in fact, only in the case of a sage who has relinished his holding on the multitude of the Strands.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yat, whatever; karma, action; tyajet, one may relinish, eva, merely; iti, as being; kuhkham, painful; [As being impossible to accomplish.] kaya-klesa-bhayat, from fear of physical suffering, out of fear of bodily pain; sah, he; krtva, having resorted; tyagam, to renunciation; rajasam, based on rajas, arising from rajas; will eva, surely; na labhet (shuld rather be labhate), not acire; tyaga-phalam, fruits of renunciation, the result called Liberation, which follows from renunciation of all actions as a conseence of Illumination.
Which, again, is the renunciation based on sattva?

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
In the course of discussion itself, He describes Rajasic abandonment also: "duḥkham...". The abandonment of obligatory action alone—which, even though it is an indirect means to liberation, requires strenuous exertion and consists of sacrifices that are accomplished by earning wealth which involves painful effort—is Rajasic, due to being caused by Rajas. By performing Rajasic abandonment, which is rooted in Rajas, one does not obtain its fruit which is characterized by steadfastness in knowledge; because knowledge arises only from Sattva. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
"duḥkham..." (it is painful). Even in the absence of the aforementioned delusion, one who is qualified for actions but whose inner instrument is not yet purified, thinking "this is indeed pain", abandons daily duty (nityakarma) out of fear of bodily suffering; such abandonment is Rajasic. For pain indeed is Rajas. Therefore, even though free from delusion, that Rajasic person, having performed such Rajasic abandonment, does not obtain at all the fruit of abandonment, namely the fruit of Sattvik abandonment characterized by steadfastness in knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He describes Rajasic abandonment: "duḥkham...". Without the realization of the Self as non-agent, knowing daily duty only as pain and abandoning it out of fear of bodily strain—such abandonment is Rajasic, because pain is of the nature of Rajas. Therefore, by performing that Rajasic abandonment, the Rajasic person does not obtain at all the fruit of abandonment which is characterized by steadfastness in knowledge. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having thus stated the mode of Tamasic abandonment, He states that of Rajasic abandonment: "duḥkham...". Even in the absence of delusion, thinking action to be pain indeed, whatever action one abandons out of fear of physical suffering, i.e., bodily pain (or, he who abandons it); he, by performing Rajasic abandonment which is brought about by Rajas, does not obtain at all the fruit of the renunciation of all actions accompanied by knowledge, which is called Liberation. By the word "eva", He indicates that a person who performs such abandonment should not even hope for Liberation.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Thus, even though there is no contrariety in the essential nature which is referred to by the word "svarupa" and is the life-giving attribute that defines it, he (Sri Ramanuja) details the Rajasic abandonment, remembering the Rajasic intellect which will be described later as contrary to the attribute that specifies the defined nature, in the words: "Although..." etc. From the restriction "as being painful" (duḥkhamityeva) and the statement "from fear of physical suffering" (kāyakleśabhayāt), the result is that there is no delusion of unrighteousness (adharma) here. In accordance with passages like "There is pain in earning wealth..." (Mahabharata 3.2.44), he says: "consisting of earning wealth which involves painful effort". By "causes mental depression" — the idea is that cheerfulness (anavasada) is counted among the seven means like discrimination (viveka), etc. With the intention that when there is a conflict between the internal and the external, the abandonment of the external is proper, he says: "the practice of knowledge alone". The basis for this are the restatement verses: "O best of the twice-born, having abandoned even the ordained actions, one should be diligent in self-knowledge, tranquility, and study of the Vedas." He states the intended meaning of the restatement "he, having resorted to Rajasic renunciation" as: "which is not the true meaning of the scriptures". With the intention that the fruit of the Sattvik abandonment to be described later is what is meant here by the word "fruit of abandonment", because this is the context of seekers of liberation and there is no occasion for fruits like heaven etc. achieved by abandoning actions, he says: "in the form of the rise of knowledge". He refutes the doubt about mental depression caused by being painful, saying: "In fact...". The meaning is: the Lord, pleased by actions performed in the manner stated as "indeed, with the desire for fruits...", indeed removes depression from the mind.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He describes Rajasic abandonment: "duḥkham...". Not knowing that abandonment is for the sake of God through attachment to God, but knowing action to be pain indeed and an obstacle to worldly Rajasic happiness, whatever action one abandons out of fear of physical suffering, i.e., fear of what is accomplished by effort; he, by performing Rajasic abandonment, indeed does not obtain the fruit of abandonment in the form of My grace etc. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Having thus stated Tamasic abandonment, He states Rajasic abandonment: "duḥkham...". He who, thinking "this action is pain indeed", abandons it out of fear of physical suffering; that person, for that very reason, by performing Rajasic abandonment which is brought about by Rajoguna, indeed does not obtain the fruit of abandonment, namely Liberation through the purification of the mind.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome or out of fear of bodily discomfort is said to have renounced in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to the elevation of renunciation.

 One who is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness should not give up earning money out of fear that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working one can engage his money in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or if by rising early in the morning one can advance his transcendental Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one should not desist out of fear or because such activities are considered troublesome. Such renunciation is in the mode of passion. The result of passionate work is always miserable. If a person renounces work in that spirit, he never gets the result of renunciation.