Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
ācāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrāstathaiva ca pitāmahāḥ .
mātulāḥ śvaśurāḥ pautrāḥ śyālāḥ sambandhinastathā

Word Meanings:
आचार्याः - teachers
पितरः - fathers
पुत्राः - sons
तथा - as well as
एव - also
च - and
पितामहाः - grandfathers
मातुलाः - maternal uncles
श्वशुराः - fathers-in-law
पौत्राः - grandsons
स्यालाः - brothers-in-law
सम्बन्धिनः - relatives
तथा - as well

Life Application:
Consider how your choices affect your family and community before taking actions driven by personal ambition.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Teachers, uncles, sons, grandfathers, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and other relatives -- these are the people (arrayed here).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Teachers, fathers, sons and also grandfathers, maternal uncles,
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other relatives,-

आचार्याः teachers? पितरः fathers? पुत्राः sons? तथा thus? एव also? च and? पितामहाः grandfathers? मातुलाः maternal uncles? श्वशुराः fathersinlaw? पौत्राः grandsons? श्यालाः brothersinlaw? सम्बन्धिनः relatives? तथा as well as.No Commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Teachers, fathers and grandfathers, sons and grandsons, uncles, father-in-law, brothers-in-law and other relatives.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Arjuna gives yet another argument to Lord Krishna against this civil war about to take place among members of the same Kshatriya family. In his emotionally overwhelmed state, Arjuna keeps producing argument after argument to justify his cowardly withdrawal, even while he is actually running away from the duty that has fallen to him by destiny. He goes on repeating what he has already said, because Krishna, through His enigmatic silence, was not accepting his arguments. The sharp smile playing on the Lord's lips was making Arjuna feel ashamed. He wanted the approval and agreement of his friend and charioteer Krishna for his views, but neither from the expression in His eyes nor from His words was he receiving the assent he desired.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O slayer-of-Mandhu (Krsna)!   I do not desire to slay these men-even though they slay me-even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds-what to speak for the sake of the [mere] earth.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Teachers, fathers, sons and also grandfathers, uncles, fathers-in-law and grandsons, brothers-in-law and other kinsmen---

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Govinda! What need do we have of a kingdom, or what (need) of enjoyments and livelihood? Those for whom kingdom, enjoyments and pleasures ae desired by us, viz teachers, uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law as also relatives-those very ones stand arrayed for battle risking their lives and wealth.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
'Matulah...': 'shyalah' means the wife's brothers, such as Dhrishtadyumna and the rest. Even though these are liable to be slain, being aggressors obstructing his own rightful kingdom, Arjuna shows -- out of the earlier-mentioned delusion arising from misplaced compassion -- his falling away from his own righteous duty of battle, in 'Etan...'. Anticipating the objection that, by the maxim 'one may slay one who seeks to slay,' killing these would incur no fault, he says, in 'Ghnato'pi...'.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
(Note: covers both verses) Teachers, fathers, sons, and likewise grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and whatever other relatives there are -- even if they strike at me, I do not wish to kill them; and O Madhusudana, even if I were to gain the kingdom of the three worlds, I do not wish to kill them, then what of merely the earth?

Explanation: Even if these kinsmen of ours, driven by anger, wish to remove what displeases them by striking and even killing me, I still do not wish, driven by anger, to kill them in order to remove what displeases me. Even if, driven by greed for kingdom in pursuit of what pleases them, they wish to kill me, I still do not wish, driven by greed in pursuit of what pleases me, to kill them. The point is: I am not willing to purchase the gates of hell by falling prey to anger and greed.

The repeated use of the word 'api' (even) twice here conveys Arjuna's intent: since I create no obstacle at all to their self-interest, why indeed would they kill me? But suppose, thinking 'this one has obstructed our self-interest before,' they were to set about destroying my body -- even then (ghnato'pi) I do not wish to kill them. Further: my killing them gaining me the kingdom of the three worlds is not even a real possibility, but suppose it were -- even then (api trailokya-rajyasya hetoh) I do not wish to kill them.

The address 'Madhusudana' (slayer of the demon Madhu) conveys: You are indeed the slayer of demons, but these teachers like Drona and grandfathers like Bhishma are hardly demons, that I should wish to kill them. They are our very closest and dearest relations.

'Acharyah' (teachers) -- among these kinsmen, to those revered teachers like Dronacharya through whom we have our bond of learning and welfare, ought I render service, or wage war against them? At a teacher's feet one ought to surrender even one's own self, one's own life. That alone is fitting for us.

'Pitarah' (fathers) -- our own body is itself but the form of those who are our fathers by bodily bond. Being their very embodiment, how could we, driven by anger or greed, kill our own fathers?

'Putrah' (sons) -- the sons of ourselves and of our brothers are, in every way, to be nurtured and protected. Even if they were to act against us, protecting them remains our duty.

'Pitamahah' (grandfathers) -- such grandfathers, being venerable even to our own fathers, are supremely venerable to us. They may chastise us, even strike us. But our conduct toward them should be such that they suffer no distress whatsoever, but rather find happiness, comfort, and service.

'Matulah' (maternal uncles) -- our maternal uncles are the brothers of the mothers who nurtured us. Hence they ought to be as venerable to us as our mothers themselves.

'Shvashurah' (fathers-in-law) -- these fathers-in-law of ours are the revered fathers of my wife and my brothers' wives. Hence they are, for us too, equal to our own fathers. How could I wish to kill them?

'Pautrah' (grandsons) -- the sons of our sons are even more deserving of nurture and protection than our sons themselves.

'Shyalah' (brothers-in-law) -- our brothers-in-law are also the beloved brothers of our own wives. How could they too be killed!

'Sambandhinah' (relatives) -- as many relatives as are visible here, and as many besides, ought to be nurtured, protected, and served -- or should they be killed? Even if killing them would gain us the kingdom of the three worlds, would killing them even then be proper? Killing them is wholly improper.

Transition: in the previous verse Arjuna gave two reasons for not killing his kinsmen. Now he establishes, from the standpoint of consequences too, that his kinsmen should not be killed.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Arjuna said -- Sanjaya said: The high-souled Partha, supremely compassionate, seeing there, stationed in both armies, his fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, and friends -- his own kinsmen arrayed for battle -- was overcome, and spoke thus to Krishna.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
'Na cha shreyah' etc. up to 'mahikrite': those wrongly conceived as objects to be slain, with the individualizing notion 'these are my teachers and the rest,' would necessarily generate sin thereby. Likewise, the act of slaying, even of those who truly deserve to be slain in battle, if undertaken with the thought 'this battle is being waged for visible ends such as pleasure, happiness and the like' -- that too necessarily generates sin. This notion lies hidden within Arjuna's objection. It is for this very reason that the Lord's reply will be given: 'you must perform actions solely as your own duty, not with the individualizing notion [of who is being slain, or of what is to be gained].'

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Anticipating the objection that those for whose sake kingdom and the rest were desired have not actually come here, he specifies them clearly. One might further object: if out of compassion you do not kill these, they will surely kill you out of greed for the kingdom -- so you yourself should kill them and enjoy the kingdom. To this he answers: even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds, I do not wish to kill these, even though they kill me; I would not even desire it, much less do it -- and certainly I would not do it for the mere attainment of the earth, is the sense. By addressing Him as 'Madhusudana,' Arjuna hints at the Lord's role as the establisher of the Vedic path.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
One might object: if out of compassion you do not kill these, they will surely kill you out of greed for the kingdom -- so you yourself should kill them and enjoy the kingdom. To this he answers, in 'Etan na...', across a verse and a half: even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds -- even to attain it -- even should they be the ones killing us, I do not wish to kill them. Much less, then, for the mere attainment of the earth, is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He specifies them, in 'Acharyah...': 'matulah' means the mother's brothers; 'shyalah' means the wife's brothers. The rest is self-evident.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Sri Venkatanatha did not comment on this verse.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He enumerates all of them by name, in 'Acharyah...'. These, who were once employed for the enjoyment of the kingdom, now stand here for the sake of dying; hence, once they are dead, since kingdom-enjoyment and the like hold no purpose left for oneself, there is nothing to be gained by killing them, is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Shyalah': the word 'shyala' has a dental-initial etymology -- as in the Vedic phrase 'vi jamatur uta vagha syalat' (from the son-in-law, or indeed from the brother-in-law); or, per Yaska, from 'laja' (parched grain) as in 'syal-lajan avapati' (he scatters the parched grain), where 'laja' derives from the root 'laj', and 'sya' (winnowing-basket) from the root 'sya'.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O Madhusudana, when teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and other relatives are ready to give up their lives and properties and are standing before me,

 Arjuna has addressed Lord Kṛṣṇa as Govinda because Kṛṣṇa is the object of all pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significant word, Arjuna indicates that Kṛṣṇa should understand what will satisfy Arjuna's senses. But Govinda is not meant for satisfying our senses. If we try to satisfy the senses of Govinda, however, then automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially, everyone wants to satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the order supplier for such satisfaction. The Lord will satisfy the senses of the living entities as much as they deserve, but not to the extent that they may covet. But when one takes the opposite way -- namely, when one tries to satisfy the senses of Govinda without desiring to satisfy one's own senses -- then by the grace of Govinda all desires of the living entity are satisfied. Arjuna's deep affection for community and family members is exhibited here partly due to his natural compassion for them. He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to show his opulence to friends and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all his relatives and friends will be killed on the battlefield and he will be unable to share his opulence after victory. This is a typical calculation of material life. The transcendental life, however, is different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy the desires of the Lord, he can, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for the service of the Lord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a farthing. Arjuna did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any need to kill them, he desired that Kṛṣṇa kill them personally. At this point he did not know that Kṛṣṇa had already killed them before their coming into the battlefield and that he was only to become an instrument for Kṛṣṇa. This fact is disclosed in following chapters. As a natural devotee of the Lord, Arjuna did not like to retaliate against his miscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the Lord's plan that they should all be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not retaliate against the wrongdoer, but the Lord does not tolerate any mischief done to the devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on His own account, but He excuses no one who has done harm to His devotees. Therefore the Lord was determined to kill the miscreants, although Arjuna wanted to excuse them.