Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
avyakto.ayamacintyo.ayamavikāryo.ayamucyate .
tasmādevaṃ viditvainaṃ nānuśocitumarhasi

Word Meanings:
अव्यक्तः - unmanifested
अयम् - this
अचिन्त्यः - unthinkable
अयम् - this
अविकार्यः - unchangeable
अयम् - this
उच्यते - is said
तस्मात् - therefore
एवम् - thus
विदित्वा - having known
एनम् - this
न - not
अनुशोचितुम् - to grieve
अर्हसि - you ought to

Life Application:
Let go of unnecessary grief by recognizing that your true nature lies far beyond temporary physical appearances.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
This Self is said to be unmanifest, unthinkable and unchangeable; therefore, knowing it thus, you ought not to grieve.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
This (Self) is said to be unmanifested, unthinkable and unchangeable. Therefore, knowing This to be such, thou shouldst not grieve.

अव्यक्तः unmanifested? अयम् this (Self)? अचिन्त्यः unthinkable? अयम् this? अविकार्यः unchangeable? अयम् this? उच्यते is said? तस्मात् therefore? एवम् thus? विदित्वा having known? एनम् this? न not? अनुशोचितुम् to grieve? अर्हसि (thou) oughtest.Commentary The Self is not an object of perception. It can hardly be seen by the physical eyes. Therefore? the Self is unmanifested. That which is seen by the eyes becomes an object of thought. As the Self cannot be perceived by the eyes? It is unthinkable. Milk when mixed with buttermilk changes its form. The Self cannot change Its form like milk. Hence? It is changeless and immutable. Therefore? thus understanding the Self? thou shouldst not mourn. Thou shouldst not think also that thou art their slayer and that they are killed by thee.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
It is named the Unmanifest, the Unthinkable, the immutable. Wherefore, knowing the Spirit as such, thou hast no cause to grieve.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
The Lord here further clarifies the nature of the Self. Through the words used here, the truth is pointed to with careful reasoning.

'Unmanifest' -- of the five great elements, the grossest, earth, is known through all five sense organs. But as we proceed toward subtler elements, we find that each is known through fewer of the five. Water lacks smell, fire lacks taste, air lacks even form. Thus space, being subtlest of all, is not perceptible to sight. That which is, by its very nature, the cause even of space cannot be known by any sense organ at all. Hence we must accept that it is unmanifest.

What is perceptible to the senses is called manifest; hence what is beyond the senses is unmanifest. Although I cannot see, hear, taste, touch or smell the tree within a seed, I nonetheless know that this very seed is the cause of the tree. In this sense, it may be said that the tree exists in the seed in an unmanifest state. Thus, to call the Self unmanifest means that it is not an object knowable through the senses. The Upanishads explain at length that the Self, being the witness of all, cannot itself become an object of sight.

'Unthinkable' -- just as the Self is not an object of the senses, so too, by calling it unthinkable here, it is shown that the mind and intellect cannot think or reflect upon the Self as they can upon other objects. The reason is that mind and intellect are themselves insentient; it is only by the light of this conscious Self that they become conscious and able to grasp other objects. How, then, could they know their own very source, the witness itself, as an object? A person looking through a telescope cannot see himself, since the same person cannot be both the seer and the seen at once. This is the sense of the word 'unthinkable.' Hence the words 'unmanifest' and 'unthinkable' should not be taken to mean that the Self is a mere negation, a non-entity.

'Unchangeable' -- an object composed of parts and possessing form is limited and subject to modification. In the partless Self, no modification of any kind is possible.

Thus Lord Krishna instructs Arjuna that, recognizing the Self in its pure form, he should abandon grief altogether. The wise man considers himself neither the slayer nor the slain.

Even if we were to accept the materialist thinkers' view that the Self is not eternal, the Lord still says --

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
This is declared to be non-evident,  imponderable,  and unchangeable.  Therefore understanding This as such you should not lament.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
This (self) is said to be unmanifest, inconceivable and unchanging. Therefore, knowing It thus, it does not  befit you to grieve.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
It is said that This is unmanifest; This is inconceivable; This is unchangeable. Therefore, having known This thus, you ougth not to grieve.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
For this very reason, it is of the nature of the unmanifest and the rest.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Since the purification of the meaning of the word 'you' is the topic at hand, he states, in that very connection, a further reason, in 'kincha...' On the doubt as to why, though the Self possesses characteristics such as eternality, it is not similarly well known, he answers, in 'avyaktah...' One might then object: if not perceptible, should it not at least be inferable? To this he answers, in 'ata eva...' He elaborates this same point, in 'yaddhi...' One might object that, though beyond the senses, it might still be an object of general perception by inference from analogy; to this he answers that, since the unchanging Self lacks any mark establishing pervasion, this is not so, in 'avikaryah...' He gives a negative-concomitance illustration for its unmodifiability, in 'yatha...' And he states the negative-concomitance inference that the Self, being a partless substance, does not undergo modification like a pot and the like, in 'niravayavatvat...'

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
This embodied one is not perceptible, is not an object of thought, and is said to be unchangeable. Hence, knowing this embodied one thus, one ought not to grieve.

Explanation -- 'Avyakto'yam' -- just as the body and the world are perceived in gross form, this embodied one is not perceptible in gross form, since it is devoid of gross creation.

'Achintyo'yam' -- mind, intellect and the like, though not perceptible, are nonetheless objects of thought, that is, all of these are objects of contemplation. But this embodied one is not even an object of thought, since it is devoid of subtle creation.

'Avikaryo'yam uchyate' -- this embodied one is said to be free of modification, that is, it never undergoes the slightest change whatsoever. Prakriti, the cause of all things, itself undergoes modification; but no modification whatsoever occurs in this embodied one, since it is devoid even of causal creation.

Here, in the twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth verses, this embodied one has been described, through eight qualifiers -- uncuttable, unburnable, unwettable, undryable, immovable, unmanifest, unthinkable, and unchangeable -- entirely by way of negation.

Along with the four qualifiers eternal, all-pervading, stationary, and ancient, this embodied one has been described positively as well. But in truth it cannot be described at all, since it is not an object of speech. How could speech and the rest, which are themselves illumined by this embodied one, ever illumine it in turn? Hence, to experience this embodied one thus is itself the only way to 'describe' it.

'Tasmad evam viditvainam nanushochitum arhasi' -- therefore, having known this embodied one to be uncuttable, undryable, eternal, ancient, unchangeable, and the rest -- that is, having so experienced it -- grief simply cannot arise at all.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The self is not made manifest by those means of knowledge by which objects susceptible to being cleft and the like are made manifest; hence it is unmanifest. Being different in kind from objects susceptible to cleaving and the like, it is inconceivable, since it does not possess the essential nature of any object and hence cannot even be conceived. Therefore it is unchanging, incapable of modification. So, knowing this self to be possessed of the qualities mentioned above, it does not become you to grieve for its sake.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
'Na enam...' through 'arhasi.' Weapons and the like, which cause destruction, can do nothing whatsoever to it. For, being by nature exclusively pure consciousness, without support, without parts, and independent, it cannot be destroyed through any sequence involving the acquisition of an altogether different nature, the destruction of a substrate, the mutual separation of parts, or the arising of some opposing factor. Nor is its passing into another body anything new for it, for even while joined to a single body, it constantly passes into a different body, becoming connected with it, since the body itself does not remain the same even for a single moment. Understanding the Self to be thus, you ought not to grieve for it.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Moreover, ucyate, it is said that; ayam, This, the Self; is avyaktah, unmanifest, since, being beyond the ken of all the organs, It cannot be objectified. For this very reason, ayam, This; is acintyah, inconceivable. For anything that comes within the purview of the organs becomes the object of thought. But this Self is inconceivable becuase It is not an object of the organs. Hence, indeed, It is avikaryah, unchangeable. This Self does not change as milk does when mixed with curd, a curdling medium, etc. And It is chnageless owing to partlessness, for it is not seen that any non-composite thing is changeful. Not being subject to transformation, It is said to be changeless. Tasmat, therefore; vidivata, having known; enam, this one, the Self; evam, thus, as described; na arhasi, you ought not; anusocitum, to grieve, thinking, 'I am the slayer of these; these are killed by me.'

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
One might object: the Lord is indeed seen and thought of by the wise, so how can it be said that 'this is unmanifest, this is inconceivable'? He answers, in 'ata eva...': this is precisely owing to His inconceivable power. As it is said: 'hence, in the infinite, there is no such mark' and so on.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Avyakto'yam...' This is truly imperishable and also inconceivable -- as per the statement, 'that which is beyond Prakriti, that is the mark of the inconceivable.' One might ask: is this not simply the well-known unmanifest Pradhana (primordial nature) itself, and why then is it being described separately? He answers, in 'avikaryo'yam...': Pradhana is indeed subject to modification, and hence is not the Self -- this is the sense. Therefore, knowing this Self to be of such a nature, you ought not to grieve.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
In the absence of any means of knowledge grasping cuttability and the rest, its non-existence too follows, he says, in the half-verse 'avyakto'yam...' That which is an object of the senses, being thus perceptible, is called 'manifest.' This Self, being devoid of form and the like, is not so. Hence there is no direct perception grasping cuttability and the like in it -- this is the sense. One might object that, even in the absence of perception, inference could still apply; to this he answers: it is inconceivable, of a different kind from what is thinkable, that is, inferable. In some cases, an inference such as fire is made by observing smoke and the like, where the pervasion has been grasped; but where there is no perception at all, the grasping of pervasion is impossible, and hence inferability too does not apply -- this is the sense. One might object that, even without direct perception, it might still be an object of inference from general observation, as with the sense organs and the like; to this he answers: it is unmodifiable. That which is subject to modification, like the eye and the like, is inferred either through presumption, from the otherwise-inexplicability of its own effect, or through inference from general observation. But this Self is neither modifiable nor subject to modification, and hence is the object of neither presumption nor inference from general observation -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
And 'avyakta' means not an object of the eye and the like; 'achintya' means not an object of the mind either; 'avikarya' means not perceptible even by the organs of action -- this is the sense. 'Uchyate' (it is said) validates the statement of the learned regarding eternality and the rest. With 'tasmat' (therefore) he concludes.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
And, being imperceptible by all the sense organs, it does not become manifest, hence it is unmanifest. It is beyond perception, not being an object of perception; it is inconceivable, inaccessible even to inference, not attainable even through inference from an effect as its mark. 'Avikarya' means it does not undergo modification -- this is the sense. From this it should also be understood that it is beyond all three bodies. As it is said in scriptures such as 'the non-knower of the Veda does not conceive that great one, since words turn back from it, together with the mind, unable to reach it' -- and so on. Hence, knowing it thus, it is not proper for you to grieve, thinking 'I am their slayer, they are slain by me.'

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Removing the doubt of direct contradiction to the previously stated inferences, and serving both to refute all objections and to conclude the present topic, he explains the verse 'avyaktah...,' in 'chedana...' By those means of knowledge through which the body and the like are shown to be fit for cutting and the rest, this Self is not so shown. The Self is apprehended only in the form 'I know,' and that too specifically as qualified by eternality and the rest; hence there is no contradiction with the substrate-grasping proof of the previously stated inferences -- this is the sense. In the Moksha-dharma section, the words 'manifest' and 'unmanifest' are explained thus: 'that which is grasped by the senses is manifest; that which is graspable only by inferential marks and beyond the senses should be known as unmanifest' (Mahabharata, Shanti Parva).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
'Avyakta' means ungraspable by ordinary sense organs. 'Achintya' means beyond the reach of the mind as well. 'Avikarya' means free of modification, or unmodifiable even by actions. It is spoken of as directly present due to its all-pervasiveness, and is spoken of in that very form by the Vedas -- this is the sense. He states the purpose for which this is said, in 'tasmat...' Hence, knowing the Self, possessed of these aforementioned qualities, it is not proper for you to grieve.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The knowable object thus described should be directly realized only by negating the three superimposed bodies present within it -- he says, in 'avyakto'yam...' 'Vyakta' (manifest) means the gross body, perceptible directly; distinct from this is the inner Self. And 'achintyah' means: distinct also from the 'chintya,' that which is fit to be thought of, inferable through the effect of illumination such as form and the like, that is, the subtle body composed of the aggregate of the eye and other senses, imperceptible directly. And 'avikaryah' means: distinct also from 'vikarya,' that which is subject to modification, fit to attain a state through the nature of gross and subtle effects, namely the causal body, the root-ignorance of the three gunas -- grasped only by the witness, through the recollection 'I who awoke from sleep knew nothing whatsoever,' and the experience 'I do not know.' 'Uchyate' (it is said) means it is described only by way of negating the manifest and the rest, not by way of positive assertion, as in 'it is of such and such a nature.' Since it is thus described, having known it, you ought not to grieve. In accordance with the scripture, 'the knower of the Self crosses over sorrow,' becoming a knower of the Self, do not grieve over the sorrow arising from separation from kinsmen -- this is the sense.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable and immutable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.

 As described previously, the magnitude of the soul is so small for our material calculation that he cannot be seen even by the most powerful microscope; therefore, he is invisible. As far as the soul’s existence is concerned, no one can establish his existence experimentally beyond the proof of śruti, or Vedic wisdom. We have to accept this truth, because there is no other source of understanding the existence of the soul, although it is a fact by perception. There are many things we have to accept solely on grounds of superior authority. No one can deny the existence of his father, based upon the authority of his mother. There is no source of understanding the identity of the father except by the authority of the mother. Similarly, there is no source of understanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words, the soul is inconceivable by human experimental knowledge. The soul is consciousness and conscious – that also is the statement of the Vedas, and we have to accept that. Unlike the bodily changes, there is no change in the soul. As eternally unchangeable, the soul remains atomic in comparison to the infinite Supreme Soul. The Supreme Soul is infinite, and the atomic soul is infinitesimal. Therefore, the infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never become equal to the infinite soul, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This concept is repeated in the Vedas in different ways just to confirm the stability of the conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary in order that we understand the matter thoroughly, without error.