Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
karmajaṃ buddhiyuktā hi phalaṃ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ .
janmabandhavinirmuktāḥ padaṃ gacchantyanāmayam

Word Meanings:
कर्मजम् - actionborn
बुद्धियुक्ताः - possessed of knowledsge
हि - indeed
फलम् - the fruit
त्यक्त्वा - having abandoned
मनीषिणः - the wise
जन्मबन्धविनिर्मुक्ताः - freed from the fetters
पदम् - the abode
गच्छन्ति - go
अनामयम् - beyond evil.

Life Application:
Release your grip on outcome expectations to experience immediate freedom from stress and chronic worry.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The wise who are united with the yoga of the intellect, having abandoned the fruits born of action, become free from the bondage of birth and attain the flawless, unafflicted state (anamaya).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The wise, possessed of knowledge, having abandoned the fruits of their actions, and being freed from the fetters of birth, go to the place which is beyond all evil.

कर्मजम् actionborn? बुद्धियुक्ताः possessed of knowledsge? हि indeed? फलम् the fruit? त्यक्त्वा having abandoned? मनीषिणः the wise? जन्मबन्धविनिर्मुक्ताः freed from the fetters of birth? पदम् the abode? गच्छन्ति go? अनामयम् beyond evil.Commentary Clinging to the fruits of actions is the cause of rirth. Man takes a body to enjoy them. If anyone performs actions for the sake of God in fulfilment of His purpose without desire for the fruits? he is released from the bonds of birth and attains to the blissful state or the immortal abode.Sages who possess evenness of mind abandon the fruits of their actions and thus escape from good and bad actions.Buddhi referred to in the three verses 49? 50 and 51 may be the wisdom of the Sankhyas? i.e.? the knowledge of the Self or AtmaJnana which dawns when the mind is purified by Karma Yoga.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The sages guided by Pure Intellect renounce the fruit of action; and, freed from the chains of rebirth, they reach the highest bliss.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Having heard the teaching to become established in yoga, a question arose in Arjuna's mind as to why he should act with equanimity at all. Anticipating this question, the Lord answers it in this verse. A 'wise person endowed with discerning intellect' (buddhiyukta manishi) is one who, knowing the art of living, performs all actions with a fully balanced mind, free from anxiety over results. In other words, only one free from ego and selfishness can truly be called a manishi. Egoism arises from identifying with the mind, and through attachment to the fruits of action one becomes entangled in bondage. Only by holding a higher goal in life does the renunciation of ego and selfishness become possible.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
By renouncing the fruit, born of action, the intelligent ones endowed with determining faculty and freed from the bond of birth,  go to the place that is devoid of illness.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The wise who possess evenness of mind, relinishing the fruits born of action, are freed from the bondage of birth, and go to the region beyond all ills.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Because, those who are devoted to wisdom, (they) becoming men of Enlightenment by giving up the fruits produced by actions, reach the state beyond evils by having become freed from the bondage of birth.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
The Lord now states the means to that end. Renouncing the fruit born of action -- that is, offering it to the Lord without desire -- those endowed with discerning intellect become men of true knowledge and attain the supreme state. Such yoga, i.e. action, is a means to knowledge, which in turn is the means to liberation.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
[Anticipating the doubt: how can one endowed with equanimity attain liberation merely by giving up good and bad actions and their fruits?] The answer is that action performed with equanimity of mind causes the abandonment of sin and its effects, and thus, by successive stages, becomes the cause of liberation. The wise (manishin), possessing superior knowledge and endowed with such intellect, perform their prescribed duties and renounce the fruit born of them -- namely, the acquisition of different types of bodies (desirable ones like those of gods, undesirable ones like those of animals). Becoming true knowers through the strength of that intellect, they renounce such fruit, and having thereby been freed from the bondage called birth while still living (jivanmukta), they attain, at death, complete freedom from embodiment (videha-kaivalya) -- the state of Vishnu, untouched by any worldly contact. The word 'buddhi' used earlier (in 'buddhiyogat...') was explained as the wisdom of equanimity; here, since equanimity's role in removing merit and demerit only operates indirectly through succession, another fitting sense of 'buddhi' is given -- namely, the wisdom whose object is unconditioned reality, universal in scope, arising from the purification of mind through karma-yoga, which directly and immediately causes freedom from the bondage of birth.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Wise seekers (manishi) established in equanimity renounce the fruit born of action and, freed from the bondage of birth, attain the changeless, flawless state (nirvikara pada).

Only one established in equanimity is truly a manishi (wise person) -- as also stated in Chapter 18.10, one who neither hates unwholesome action nor is attached to wholesome action is called wise (medhavi). Action always ripens into some fruit; no one can literally discard that fruit -- if a farmer sows seed without desire for personal gain, the crop still grows. So a seeker who acts without personal motive still receives the fruit of action. Hence 'renouncing the fruit born of action' really means renouncing the desire, craving, sense of possession, and longing for that fruit -- and everyone is capable of renouncing these.

Being established in equanimity, such seekers become free of attachment, aversion, craving, longing, and possessiveness, so no cause for rebirth remains in them; they are forever freed from the bondage of birth and death.

'Anamaya' means free from disease -- a state without the slightest trace of disorder. Such wise, equanimous people attain this changeless, flawless state, elsewhere called the 'imperishable state' (15.5) and the 'eternal imperishable state' (18.56).

Although the Gita elsewhere calls sattva-guna 'anamaya' (14.6), in truth the only truly changeless reality is one's own essential nature, the Supreme -- being beyond the gunas, attaining which no one returns to the cycle of birth and death; sattva is called anamaya only because it helps one reach that Reality.

What does it mean to attain the anamaya state? Prakriti (nature) is subject to change, and so are its products -- the body and the world. Though the self is inherently changeless, when it identifies with this changeable body it comes to consider itself changeable too. But when it gives up this assumed identification with the body, it experiences its own natural, changeless essence -- and this experience of one's inherent changelessness is what is here called 'attaining the anamaya state.'

The plural forms 'buddhiyuktah' and 'manishinah' indicate that everyone who becomes established in equanimity attains this state and is liberated, without exception. Thus equanimity is the unfailing means to attain the changeless state: once the bond with things subject to arising and destruction ends, the self-evident, ever-present changelessness is spontaneously experienced, requiring no effort to create, since it is not something constructed but one's natural, ever-existing state.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Those who possess this evenness of mind while performing actions and relinish their fruits, are freed from the bondage of rirth, and go to the region beyond all ills. 'Hi' means that this dictum or teaching is well known in all the Upanisads.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Karmajam etc.  The persons who are endowed with the determining faculty with regard to the Yoga,  renounce the birth-bondage, by renouncing the fruit of actions; and they attain the Brahman-existence.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
The words 'phalam tyaktva, by giving up the fruits' are connected with the remote word 'karmajam, produced by actions'.
Hi, because; [Because, when actions are performed with an attitude of eanimity, it leads to becoming freed from sin etc. Therefore, by stages, it becomes the cause of Liberation as well.] buddhi-yuktah, those who are devoted to wisdom, who are imbued with the wisdom of eanimity; (they) becoming manisinah, men of Enlightenment; tyaktva, by giving up; phalam, the fruit, the acisition of desirable and undesriable bodies; [Desirable: the bodies of gods and others; undesirable: the bodies of animals etc.] karmajam, produced by actions; gacchanti, reach; padam, the state, the supreme state of Visnu, called Liberation; anamayam, beyond evils, i.e. beyond all evils; by having become janma-bandha-vinirmuktah, freed from the bondage of birth  birth (janma) itself is a bondage (bandha); becoming freed from that , even while living.
Or:  Since it (buddhi) has been mentioned as the direct cause of the elimination of righteousness and unrighteousness, and so on, therefore what has been presented (in the three verses) beginning with, 'O Dhananjaya,৷৷.to the yoga of wisdom' (49), is enlightenment itself, which consists in the realization of the supreme Goal, which is comparable to a flood all around, and which arises from the purification of the mind as a result of Karma-yoga. [In the first portion of the Commentary buddhi has been taken to mean samattva buddhi (wisdom of eanimity); the alternative meaning of buddhi has been taken as 'enlightenment'. So, action is to be performed by taking the help of the 'wisdom about the supreme Reality' which has been chosen as one's Goal.]

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
[Anticipating the objection that this verse adds nothing beyond what was said before,] it is explained that the verse describes both the means (yoga) to knowledge and the liberation it leads to, thereby elaborating the sense of the two preceding verses. 'Renouncing the fruit born of action' means offering it, without desire, to the Lord, since one cannot literally renounce a fruit not yet obtained. To avoid redundancy between 'buddhiyukta' and 'manishin,' it is clarified that 'buddhiyukta' refers to those possessing right, scripture-born knowledge of reality, while 'manishin' denotes those with direct, immediate realization. Thus, though expressed in a single sentence, the verse conveys two distinct topics -- the yoga (comprising renunciation of the fruit of action along with its other components) and the nature of liberation -- the yoga being fully indicated by the phrase 'having renounced the fruit born of action.'

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Lord thus shows, through the practice of right conduct, the manner in which those devoted to yoga attain perfection: having renounced the fruit of action, and being freed from that bondage which is birth itself, they attain the flawless (anamaya) state -- the imperishable, essential abode (akshara-svarupa).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
[Anticipating the objection that only relinquishing bad karma should be needed, not good karma, since giving up good karma might seem to forfeit a valid human goal,] the Lord shows that renouncing even this trivial fruit leads to the attainment of the supreme human goal. Those endowed with the wisdom of equanimity -- who perform actions solely to worship the Lord, renouncing the fruit born of action -- become, through purification of the mind, true knowers of the Self, established in the realization born of the teaching 'Tat tvam asi' ('That thou art'). Being such, they become wholly and finally freed from the bondage called birth, and attain that which is to be attained: the blissful nature of the Self, termed anamaya because it is free from the disease of ignorance and its effects -- the fearless goal called liberation, attained as non-different from themselves. Having thus renounced desire for the fruit and performed actions with equanimity, their inner faculties are purified, ignorance and its effects destroyed by the Self-knowledge born of the teaching 'Tat tvam asi,' and they attain the supreme state of Vishnu called liberation, consisting in the cessation of all misfortune and the attainment of supreme bliss. This answers Arjuna's earlier request to be told decisively what is truly good for him: one seeking that good should practice this kind of karma-yoga.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The Lord explains how actions become a means to liberation: renouncing the fruit born of action, performing action solely to worship the Lord, the wise become true knowers, are freed from the bondage that is birth, and attain the flawless state of Vishnu, free from all affliction, called liberation.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
[Anticipating the doubt that mere renunciation of merit and demerit yields no result,] the Lord explains: since the wise, endowed with the intellect of equanimity, renounce the fruit born of action -- namely, the attainment of desirable and undesirable bodies -- and become true knowers, they are freed from the bondage that is birth itself, and attain the supreme, flawless state of Vishnu called liberation; that is, they come to know their own true nature even while still living. Alternatively, 'renouncing the fruit born of action' may refer to those endowed with the discriminative wisdom of Sankhya, whose minds have become pure and one-pointed.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
[Anticipating the objection that, since actions have their own independent fruits, how can they serve as a means to devotion,] the Lord explains: 'manishinah' means those who know the meaning of the scriptures; being endowed with such intellect through effort directed toward devotion, they surely renounce the fruit born of action and, freed from the bondage of birth, attain the flawless state, which is of the nature of devotion (bhakti). Disease and affliction occur elsewhere, but never in devotion, which consists in taking refuge at the Lord's feet. This is why the Srimad Bhagavatam (10.3.27), in Devaki's hymn of praise, establishes that at the Lord's feet there is freedom from the fear of death.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The Lord states this very point: 'buddhiyuktah' means those endowed with the intellect of equanimity. Renouncing the fruit born of the action being performed, and becoming manishin -- capable of mastering the mind -- they are freed from the bondage that is birth, and attain the flawless, untroubled state called liberation.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
By thus engaging in devotional service to the Lord, great sages or devotees free themselves from the results of work in the material world. In this way they become free from the cycle of birth and death and attain the state beyond all miseries [by going back to Godhead].

 The liberated living entities belong to that place where there are no material miseries. The Bhāgavatam (10.14.58) says: samāṣritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām “For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda, or the giver of mukti, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in a calf’s footprint. Paraṁ padam, or the place where there are no material miseries, or Vaikuṇṭha, is his goal, not the place where there is danger in every step of life.” Owing to ignorance, one does not know that this material world is a miserable place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignorance only, less intelligent persons try to adjust to the situation by fruitive activities, thinking that the resultant actions will make them happy. They do not know that no kind of material body anywhere within the universe can give life without miseries. The miseries of life, namely birth, death, old age and diseases, are present everywhere within the material world. But one who understands his real constitutional position as the eternal servitor of the Lord, and thus knows the position of the Personality of Godhead, engages himself in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomes qualified to enter into the Vaikuṇṭha planets, where there is neither material, miserable life nor the influence of time and death. To know one’s constitutional position means to know also the sublime position of the Lord. One who wrongly thinks that the living entity’s position and the Lord’s position are on the same level is to be understood to be in darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves the way for the repetition of birth and death. But one who, understanding that his position is to serve, transfers himself to the service of the Lord, at once becomes eligible for Vaikuṇṭha-loka. Service for the cause of the Lord is called karma-yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words, devotional service to the Lord.