Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
asau mayā hataḥ śatrurhaniṣye cāparānapi .
īśvaro.ahamahaṃ bhogī siddho.ahaṃ balavānsukhī

Word Meanings:
असौ - that
मया - by me
हतः - slain
शत्रुः - enemy
हनिष्ये - shall slay
च - and
अपरान् - others
अपि - also
ईश्वरः - Lord
अहम् - I
अहम् - I
भोगी - the enjoyer
सिद्धः - perfect
अहम् - I
भोगी - the enjoyer
सिद्धः - perfect
अहम् - I
बलवान् - powerful
सुखी - happy.

Life Application:
'That enemy has been slain by me, others also I shall slay; I am lord, enjoyer, successful, powerful, happy'.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
'That enemy has been killed by me, and I shall kill others as well. I am the lord, I am the enjoyer, I am successful, mighty and happy.'

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
"That enemy has been slain by me; and others also I shall slay. I am the lord. I enjoy. I am perfect, powerful and happy."

असौ that? मया by me? हतः slain? शत्रुः enemy? हनिष्ये (I) shall slay? च and? अपरान् others? अपि also? ईश्वरः Lord? अहम् I? अहम् I? भोगी the enjoyer? सिद्धः perfect? अहम् I? भोगी the enjoyer? सिद्धः perfect? अहम् I? बलवान् powerful? सुखी happy.Commentary I will be the lord of all I survey. I will kill everyone who will not serve me. In fact I am the lord of all creation. I will be successful in all my undertakings. I have got plenty of landed property? cattle and immense wealth. I have got plenty of children and grandchildren. Even Indra is not eal to me. I am not an ordinary man. I am very powerful? strong? healthy and happy in every respect.In this verse there is a description of the vain imaginations of the people of demoniacal nature.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
I have slain one enemy, I will slay the others also; I am worthy to enjoy, I am the Almighty, I am perfect, powerful and happy;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
'That enemy has been killed by me, and I shall kill others as well. I am the lord, I am the enjoyer, I am well-established, mighty and happy.'

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that this is the ego-centric song of success that a demoniac person constantly sings. Under the intoxicating effect of material power, the divine values of a human being are put to sleep. Such a person views himself as the ultimate controller (Isvara), the sole enjoyer (bhogi), perfect (siddha), strong (balavan), and happy (sukhi), completely blind to the fact that his pride is leading to his downfall.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
'That enemy has been slain by me; and I shall slay others also;  I am the lord; I am a man of enjoyment;  I am successful, mighty and happy';

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
'This enemy is slain by me; and others also I shall slay. I am the Lord, I am the enjoyer, I am successful, I have strength, I have happiness.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
'That enemy has been killed by me, and I shall kill others as well. I am the lord, I am the enjoyer, I am well-established, mighty and happy.'

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that Asuri people think that they can destroy all their enemies. They regard themselves as the Lord (Isvara), enjoyer of all material pleasures, perfect, powerful, and free from diseases.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
'That enemy has been slain by me, and those other enemies also I shall slay. I am the lord, I am the enjoyer, I am successful, mighty and happy.'

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that driven by anger and pride, Asuri individuals boast about killing their rivals. If they suffer a defeat, they hide it so as not to appear weak. They consider themselves all-powerful (Isvara) and boast about their luxuries (wife, house, cars). They think they are perfect (siddha) and laugh at those who perform devotion or prayers, believing themselves to be the strongest and happiest in the world.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
This enemy has been slain by me, powerful as I am. I shall slay other enemies also - I who am heoric and valiant. What is the use of the conception of destiny, which is only an imagination of weak people of little understanding?

Similarly:

I am 'the lord,' viz., I am independent, and I am also the ruler of others. I am the 'enjoyer,' viz., I am the enjoyer through my own powers, and not through good fortune etc. I am 'successful,' viz., I am successful by myself and not through any destiny etc. Likewise, I am strong and happy by myself.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.13–16.16 jointly): Idam adya etc. upto asucau.  Endowed with many thoughts etc.  For, they do not have any conviction. Into the hell and what is foul :  in the [hell] Avici and the  like and in the regular succession of  birth and death.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Asau, that; unconerable satruh, enemy, named Devadatta; hatah, has been killed; naya, by me; and hanisye, I shall kill; aparan, the other wretched ones. What will these pitiable persons do? There is none eal to me at all. Aham, I; am the isvarah, lord; I am the bhogi, enjoyer; and I am siddhah, well-established in every respect-I am blessed with sons, and grandsons born of sons and daughters. Not only am I a man, but I am also balavan, mighty; and I myself am sukhi, happpy; others are born to be but a burden to the earth!

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains their anger and pride. They boast about easily destroying their enemies and acquiring their wealth and wives. They believe they are not ordinary humans but lords (Isvara) of everything, blessed with family, strength, and health.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that they boast of killing their enemies and look forward to destroying others as well, considering themselves successful, powerful, and happy.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that Asuri individuals are filled with pride. They boast of having slain their enemies and believe that nobody is equal to them. They think they are lords, enjoyers of pleasures, perfect in terms of lineage, powerful, and happy.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that they rely solely on their own valor and disregard destiny. They believe they are independent (Isvara), rulers of others, self-perfected (siddha), strong, and happy by their own merit.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that they boast of killing their enemies and plan to kill others without realizing God's will. They believe they can perform any action, enjoy all resources, and possess the strength to destroy their enemies.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that their anger and lust are shown in their desire to slay enemies and enjoy all sensory pleasures, believing they are all-powerful.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
One who discourses on this confidential knowledge, to My devotees, shall be performing the highest form of loving service to Me, and with the understanding that this is My wish, shall attain fulfillment.

There is no purport for this verse