Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
ūrdhvaṃ gacchanti sattvasthā madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ .
jaghanyaguṇavṛttisthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ

Word Meanings:
ऊर्ध्वम् - upwards
गच्छन्ति - go
सत्त्वस्थाः - in Sattva seated
मध्ये - in the middle
तिष्ठन्ति - dwell
राजसाः - the Rajasic
जघन्यगुणवृत्तिस्थाः - abiding in the function
अधः - downwards
गच्छन्ति - go
तामसाः - the Tamasic.

Life Application:
Those in goodness go upward; those in passion remain in middle; those in ignorance go downward.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Those who are established in Sattva go upwards; the Rajasic dwell in the middle; and the Tamasic, abiding in the lowest tendencies of Tamas, go downwards.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Those who are seated in Sattva go upwards; the Rajasic dwell in the middle; and the Tamasic, abiding in the function of the lowest Guna, go downwards.

ऊर्ध्वम् upwards? गच्छन्ति go? सत्त्वस्थाः in Sattva seated? मध्ये in the middle? तिष्ठन्ति dwell? राजसाः the Rajasic? जघन्यगुणवृत्तिस्थाः abiding in the function of the lowest Guna? अधः downwards? गच्छन्ति go? तामसाः the Tamasic.Commentary Those who abide in Sattva become the lords of heaven after giving up the physical body. The Rajasic are rorn on this earth as human beings. The Tamasic go downwards? i.e.? they will be born in the wormbs of cattle and beasts. They may take their birth amongst the lowest grades of human beings. The lowest grades of human beings are only brutes though they have assumed human form. Their actions are brutal. Therefore it is not necessary for them to enter into animal incarnation.Man identifies himself with Nature on account of the force of ignorance or illusory knowledge and gets attached to the alities of Nature. This is the cause of his birth in the wombs of high or low creatures. He feels? I am happy? miserable or deluded? on account of the attachment to the Gunas.The nature of the Gunas? their functions? how they bind a man to the Samsara? the effects of each Guna when it is predominant? and the plane reached by the man when he is under the influence of a particular Guna are described in the previous verses. Now the Lord describes in the following verse that liberation comes when one knows Him Who is above the three Gunas.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
When Purity is in the ascendant, the man evolves; when Passion, he neither evolves nor degenerates; when Ignorance, he is lost.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
There are three steps on the ladder of evolution. At the lowest level of evolution stand the plant and animal kingdoms. Man, endowed with intellect and genius, stands in the middle; and we learn from the Vedas that the gods in heaven exist in a state higher than man. Here evolution means a vast field of experiences and knowledge, reduction of agitations, and sharp intellectual clarity. The yardstick to measure evolution is the amount of happiness, peace, and bliss experienced by living beings. From this perspective, the evolution of a stone would be considered zero. Thereafter, the order of higher stages of evolution is plant, animal, human, and god. Undoubtedly, a human being endowed with sharp intellect is superior to animals, but he too has limitations of time and space. When these limitations are broken, man attains the superior birth of gods. For instance, consider a two-story building. The staircase built to reach the room on the second floor is divided into two parts. After climbing a few steps in the first part, there is a landing in the middle, from where one turns to climb the second part of the staircase. Those standing at the very bottom are at the lowest level of evolution, those on the landing are at a higher state, while those who have climbed the second part are at the highest state. At the bottom are plants and animals, in the middle is man, and in the higher position are the gods. Note that none of these three has reached the comfortable, amenity-filled room itself. Man in the middle has the freedom to move to a higher or lower state. If we understand this illustration clearly, we can be said to have understood the theory of evolution described in Hindu philosophy to some extent. Here the yardstick of evolution is the amount of Consciousness expressed by each evolved being.

Those established in Sattva reach higher spheres. People who lead a pure life of discrimination, contemplation, right judgment, and self-control experience a progressive increase in Sattvaguna. Such calm, creative, and dynamic men progress toward higher worlds.

People of Rajasic nature, full of desires, agitations, ambition, and achievement, repeatedly attain the human world until they gain the necessary mental purity.

Beings indulging in lowest tendencies like negligence, delusion, and ignorance bring about their own downfall.

While describing the continuity of the individual soul's existence even after death, Lord Krishna also illustrated the influence of the three Gunas on the soul's movement. The above verse is a summary of that. But where then is liberation from worldly existence? These three Gunas, like ropes, bind us to the body and its sorrows, the mind and its agitations, the intellect and its vibrations and limitations. When shall we be free from this worldly bondage and experience our true nature of Existence-Consciousness-Bliss (Satchidananda)?

Until now, the nature and characteristics of the three Gunas and their influence on the post-mortem movement of the soul have been described. But all this is merely a description of the causes of our bondage. The self situated in Nature is called the individual soul (jiva). Experience of the transient world and sorrows of disappointment—all this constitutes the world of the jiva. Liberation can be attained only by transcending the three Gunas.

A patient suffering from high fever experiences unbearable pain in the head and back. This pain is a symptom of the disease. Even after the fever subsides, the patient continues to suffer. Only when he is completely free from the symptoms of the disease and recovers his former health and strength can we call him fully healthy. Similarly, real liberation is transcending the three Gunas and remaining established in one's true nature of bliss.

Now, how liberation is attained through right vision is described next.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Those who are established in the Sattva, go upward; the persons given to the Rajas,  remain in the middle [state];  those who are given to the Tamas, being established in the tendencies of bad alities, go downwards.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Those who rest in Sattva rise upwards; those who abide in Rajas remain in the middle; and those, abiding in the tendencies of Tamas go downwards.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
People who conform to sattva go higher up; those who conform to rajas stay in the middle; those who conform to tamas, who conform to the actions of the lowest ality, go down.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having stated the fruits of Sattvic and other knowledge and actions, the author concludes generally in order to summarize what was left unsaid: 'Furthermore...' This means that Sattva and other Gunas are also known through the fruits to be described later. The conduct of Sattvaguna is pure knowledge or action; those who abide in it are Sattvastha. The Rajasic are those engaged in knowledge or action caused by Rajoguna.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Persons situated in Sattvaguna go to the higher worlds; persons situated in Rajoguna take birth in the mortal world; and persons situated in the abominable functions of Tamoguna suffer downfall to lower states.

Commentary -- Urdhvam gacchanti sattvasthah: Those in whose life Sattvaguna has predominated and consequently who have exercised control over enjoyments, performed auspicious deeds such as pilgrimages, vows, charity, etc., run water-kiosks, food centers for the comfort of others, built roads, planted trees and built cow shelters for the convenience of animals and birds—such persons are called 'Sattvasthah' here. When such persons leave their bodies during the predominance of Sattvaguna, then due to association with Sattvaguna and attachment to Sattvaguna, they go to higher worlds such as heaven. The description of those worlds is given in verse 14 of this chapter by the words 'uttamavidam amalan lokan'. Those going to higher worlds obtain bodies dominated by the light/fire element (tejastattva).
Madhye tisthanti rajasah: Those persons in whose life Rajoguna predominates and who, while staying within scriptural limits, remain engaged in accumulating wealth, enjoying pleasures, holding attachment and possessiveness towards objects, etc., are called 'Rajasah' here. When such persons leave their body during the predominance of Rajoguna (i.e. thinking of Rajasic pursuits), they are born again in this mortal world. Here they receive human bodies dominated by the earth element (prithvitattva).
The use of the word 'tisthanti' signifies that Rajasic persons remain as they are in this mortal world; after death they return to this mortal world and become similar to what they were before. They do not commit impure conduct, do not break scriptural limits, but rather remain within scriptural limits and act purely; however, due to attachment and possessiveness toward objects, individuals, etc., they are born again in the mortal world.
Jaghanyagunavrttisthah adho gacchanti tamasah: Those persons in whose life Tamoguna predominates and consequently, under the influence of negligence, waste money and time uselessly, remain lying in laziness and sleep, do not perform even necessary duties on time, constantly think of harming others, cause pain to others, commit condemnable acts like lying, deceit, theft, robbery, etc.—such persons are called 'jaghanyagunavrttisthah' here. When such persons die during the predominance of Tamoguna (thinking of Tamasic activities), they suffer downfall to lower states.
Downfall (adhogati) has two divisions: specific species (yonivishesha) and specific realms (sthanavishesha). Species like animals, birds, insects, moths, snakes, scorpions, ghosts, etc., are specific species of downfall; while hellish pits like Vaitarani, Asipatra, Lalabhaksha, Kumbhipaka, Raurava, Maharaurava, etc., are specific realms of downfall. Those in whose life Sattvaguna or Rajoguna predominated, but at the final moment Tamoguna temporarily rises, go after death to lower species (deluded births, Gita 14.15). Those in whose life Tamoguna continuously predominated and who leave the body in that state go after death to specific hellish realms (Gita 16.16). The implication is that the final thought of a Sattvic, Rajasic, or Tamasic person determines their realm of birth, but their experience of happiness or suffering is according to their past karmas. For instance, if one's deeds are good, but the final thought was of a dog, according to the final thought he becomes a dog, but even in that animal birth he receives great comfort and care due to good deeds. If deeds are bad, but the final thought was human, he becomes human according to the final thought, but receives terrible circumstances as the fruit of bad deeds—suffering from diseases, struggling even to get food, water, and clothing.
To cultivate Sattvaguna, a seeker should stay engaged in reading holy scriptures, consume Sattvic food and drink, avoiding Rajasic and Tamasic diet. He should associate with Sattvic, noble persons, stay near them, and practice according to their advice. He should visit pure, holy places and avoid noisy, Rajasic places, as well as Tamasic places selling eggs, meat, and alcohol. Morning and evening times are considered Sattvic, so one should utilize these times for prayer and meditation. One should perform only scripturally ordained good deeds, avoiding forbidden, Rajasic, or Tamasic actions. Whatever varna or ashrama one belongs to, one should properly fulfill one's duty. Meditate on God alone and chant Sattvic mantras. Thus by making everything Sattvic, old samskaras are erased and Sattvic impressions increase. In Srimad Bhagavatam, ten factors enhancing the Gunas are mentioned: scriptural texts, water/food, association, place, time, action, birth, meditation, mantra, and purificatory rites—if these ten are Sattvic, Sattvaguna increases; if Rajasic, Rajoguna; if Tamasic, Tamoguna.
Special Note: A person dying during a temporary rise of Rajoguna is born in the human world (14.15) and a person with predominant Rajoguna also returns to the human world (14.18)—both show that all human beings in this world are predominantly Rajasic, not purely Sattvic or Tamasic. If so, then why did the Lord state that one dying in Sattvaguna goes to higher worlds (14.14, 14.18) and one in Tamoguna goes downwards (14.15, 14.18)? The solution is: in the higher realm, Sattvaguna predominates, but Rajoguna and Tamoguna are present in minor proportions. Hence devas also exhibit Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic natures. Similarly in the middle realm, Rajoguna predominates along with underlying Sattva and Tamas. Thus human beings also possess Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic natures. In lower realms, Tamoguna predominates along with underlying Sattva and Rajas. Hence animals, ghosts, and hellish beings also show varying natures. Therefore, as stated in 18.40, no creature in the three worlds is completely free from the three Gunas.
Relation: After introducing the Gunas and their functions from verse 5 to 18, the Lord now describes in the next two verses the experience of transcending the three Gunas.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Thus, in the manner explained, those who 'rest in Sattva rise upwards,' namely, they attain liberation from the bonds of Samsara gradually. Those who, 'abiding in Rajas' which produces greed for heaven etc., engage themselves in actions which constitute the means for obtaining such results. Experiencing those results, they are born again and engage in, and perform, the very same acts. So they remain in the 'middle'. This is mostly suffering, as it is characterised by rirths. Those of Tamasic nature 'stoop down' into lower levels, as Tamas grows ever worse in them. They go 'downwards' i.e., to the lowest state among human beings, then to the condition of animals; then to that of worms; insects etc., then of immovable things, and even to the condition of shrubs and creepers, and ultimately to the condition of stones, wood, clod of earth, straw etc.

Sri Krsna now teaches about the manner of those in whom the Sattva has gradually increased by adopting special holy food and performance of special disinterested deeds, and who thus rise upward by transcending the Gunas.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 14.16–14.20 jointly): Karmanah etc. upto asnute.  Here, there are certain unconnected verses that have been concocted.  They are of the nature of repetition, and hence they have to be necessarily rejected.  A mode of life transcending these Strands turn to be nothing but emancipation.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sattvasthah, people who conform to sattva, to the actions of sattva ality; gacchanti, go, are born; undhavam, higher up, in the worlds of gods and others. Rajasah, those who conform to rajas; [Those who are endowed with sense-knowledge and actions conseent on the preponderance of rajas.] tisthanti, stay, are born; madhye, in the middle, among human beings. Tamasah, those who conform to tamas, jaghanya-gunavrttasthah [A variant reading is vrttisthah.-Tr.], who conform to actions of the lowest ality of tamas, those who are attached to its actions-sleep, laziness, etc.-, the foolish; gacchanti, go; adhah, down, (i.e.) they are born among cattle etc.
The association, owing to the false ignorance in the form of 'being seated in Nature', that an individual soul has with the gunas-in the form of happiness, sorrow and delusion, and which are matters of experience in such ways as, 'I am happy,' 'I am sorrowful,' 'I am ignorant,'-that (association) is the cause of the individual soul's mundane existence characterized by coming to have births in good and bad species. This was stated briefly in the earlier chapter. Elaborating that here in the text beginning with, 'the alities, viz sattva, rajas and tamas, born of Nature' (5), the Lord has said that the nature of the alities, the conduct conforming to the alities, and the power to bind that the alities have through actions conforming to them, and also the course of a person under the bondage, of behaviour conforming to the alities,-all this is false knowledge; it has ignorance as its root and is the cause of bondage.
Now, it is necessary to state that Liberation follows from right knowledge. Hence the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The Lord explains the division of destinations according to the Gunas: 'Those who are established in Sattva go upwards'—even up to Brahmaloka and liberation. But the Rajasic stay in the middle, because greed has been described as existing in that state. The abominable or lowest quality is Tamas; its function is negligence, delusion, etc. Those abiding in it go downwards. There, their stay is in lower realms like Atala, as is the case with demons like Vairochana and others; or they go into lower species, hells, etc.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Now the author describes the previously stated fruits of those conforming to the conduct of Sattva and other Gunas in terms of higher, middle, and lower states. Since the word 'vritta' (conduct) is used in the third Guna, it is intended for the first two Gunas as well. Thus, those established in Sattva are engaged in Sattvic conduct, namely scriptural knowledge and action; they go upwards to the realm of gods up to Satyaloka, taking birth among gods according to the degree of their knowledge and action. Likewise, the Rajasic, who are engaged in Rajasic action motivated by greed, stay in the middle, namely the human world mixed with merit and sin; they neither go up nor down, but are born among humans. Those abiding in the conduct of the lowest quality, who stay in the function of Tamas (which is inferior to the other two Gunas), such as sleep and laziness, go downwards and are born among animals, etc. Sometimes Sattvic and Rajasic persons may also temporarily abide in the conduct of Tamas; hence the Lord specifies 'Tamasah', meaning those who are constantly dominated by Tamas, whereas for others, even if that conduct occurs occasionally, Tamas is not predominant.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Now Sri Sridhara Swami explains the difference in results for those according to the nature of Sattva and other Gunas: 'Upwards...' Sattvasthah, those dominated by Sattvic tendencies, go upwards. Meaning, according to the graduation of Sattvic excellence, they attain realms of hundredfold increasing bliss—from Manushya-Gandharva, Pitri, Deva realms up to Satyaloka. The Rajasic, distressed by cravings, stay in the middle, taking birth in the human world itself. The abominable quality is the lowest Tamoguna; its function is delusion, negligence, etc. Those abiding in it go downwards, taking birth in hells like Tamisra according to the degree of Tamasic conduct.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Therefore, one should abide in Sattva alone, not in Rajas or Tamas—to teach this, the author concludes by stating the difference in results for those established in Sattva and other Gunas: 'Upwards...' Here, as the word 'vritta' (conduct) is used in Tamas, conduct is intended for Sattva and Rajas as well. Sattvasthah, those engaged in scriptural worship and action conforming to Sattva, go upwards to Brahmaloka according to the degree of their worship and are born among devas. Likewise, the Rajasic, engaged in desire-driven or forbidden Rajasic actions born of greed, dwell in the middle human world full of sorrow and with little pleasure, taking birth among humans. Those abiding in the conduct of the abominable quality—Tamas, which is lowest compared to the other two Gunas—such as sleep and laziness, being deluded Tamasic souls, always go downwards and are born among animals, etc.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Now Sri Purushottamji describes their result and its nature: 'Upwards...' Sattvasthah, those engaged in Sattvic actions, go upwards to Satyaloka and other higher realms. The Rajasic, engaged in Rajasic actions, stay in the middle human world, which is surrounded by sorrow and yields fruits of pleasures like kingdom, etc. Those abiding in Tamas (the abominable quality) and its functions, performing such Tamasic actions, go downwards to lower species, hells, etc.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Since knowledge and other qualities arise from Sattva and other Gunas, those who meet death during the increase of Sattva and other Gunas are born progressively in superior, middle, and inferior species—to explain this, the author says: 'Upwards...' Urdhvam means in the divine realm (Devabhava); Madhye means in human state (Manushabhava); Adhah means in hellish, animal, or unmoving states (Sthavarabhava). Abominable means condemnable conduct of quality like sleep, laziness, negligence, etc.; those situated in it are Tamasic persons.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those in the abominable mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds.

 In this verse the results of actions in the three modes of nature are more explicitly set forth. There is an upper planetary system, consisting of the heavenly planets, where everyone is highly elevated. According to the degree of development of the mode of goodness, the living entity can be transferred to various planets in this system. The highest planet is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka, where the prime person of this universe, Lord Brahmā, resides. We have seen already that we can hardly calculate the wondrous condition of life in Brahmaloka, but the highest condition of life, the mode of goodness, can bring us to this. The mode of passion is mixed. It is in the middle, between the modes of goodness and ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if he should be purely in the mode of passion, he will simply remain on this earth as a king or a rich man. But because there are mixtures, one can also go down. People on this earth, in the mode of passion or ignorance, cannot forcibly approach the higher planets by machine. In the mode of passion, there is also the chance of becoming mad in the next life. The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here as abominable. The result of developing ignorance is very, very risky. It is the lowest quality in material nature. Beneath the human level there are eight million species of life – birds, beasts, reptiles, trees, etc. – and according to the development of the mode of ignorance, people are brought down to these abominable conditions. The word tāmasāḥ is very significant here. Tāmasāḥ indicates those who stay continuously in the mode of ignorance without rising to a higher mode. Their future is very dark. There is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passion to be elevated to the mode of goodness, and that system is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But one who does not take advantage of this opportunity will certainly continue in the lower modes.