Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
viviktasevī laghvāśī yatavākkāyamānasaḥ .
dhyānayogaparo nityaṃ vairāgyaṃ samupāśritaḥ

Word Meanings:
विविक्तसेवी - dwelling in solitude
लघ्वाशी - eating but little
यतवाक्कायमानसः - speech
ध्यानयोगपरः - engaged in meditation and
नित्यम् - always
वैराग्यम् - dispassion
समुपाश्रितः - resorting to.

Life Application:
Dwelling in solitude, eating sparingly, speech/body/mind controlled, ever intent on yoga of meditation, taking refuge in dispassion...

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Dwelling in solitude, eating sparingly, with speech, body and mind controlled, ever devoted to the yoga of meditation, and taking refuge in dispassion...

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Dwelling in solitude, eating but little, with speech, body and mind subdued, always engaged in meditation and concentration, resorting to dispassion.

विविक्तसेवी dwelling in solitude? लघ्वाशी eating but little? यतवाक्कायमानसः speech? body and mind subdued? ध्यानयोगपरः engaged in meditation and concentration? नित्यम् always? वैराग्यम् dispassion? समुपाश्रितः resorting to.Commentary Solitude has its own charms. The spiritual vibrations in solitude are wonderfully elevating. Meditation will come by itself without exertion. All saints and sages who have attained Selfrealisation have remained in solitude for a number of years. You will have good meditation if you sit on the bank of a river? in a cave or on the seashore or in a jungle. During the Christmas and Easter holidays you can all enjoy the peace of solitude. It is very necessary to live in solitude at least for a month or a fortnight in a year for the householders. Instead of wasting time? energy and money in Calcutta or any other city? during the holidays? live in holy places like Rishikesh? Uttarakasi or Naimisaranya drink the nectar of peace in such places by doing Anushthana (intense and systematic spiritual practice) or Japa of a Mantra and attain immortality. If you once taste the bliss of solitude you will never forget it. Every year you will attempt to taste it again. He who takes too much food (a glutton) is ite unfit for meditation or the spiritual path. Too much food will produce laziness? a halfsleepy state and deep sleep also. Eat to live. Eat in moderation. You will have a light body and light? cheerful and serene mind. This will help you in your practice of meditation. Observe Mauna or the vow of silelnce for a week or a month. Observe the vow for two hours daily. Control the body. Practise Ahimsa and Brahmacharya. Meditate on the Self or on the Lord Hari with four hands? or on Lord Krishna? Rama or Siva. Be regular in your meditation and gradually increase the period of meditation from 15 minutes to 3 or 6 hours at a sitting. If you are a wholetimed aspirant? spend the whole time in meditation. If you are not able to do this? do Likhita Japa (writing the Mantra) and Kirtan (singing the Names and glories of the Lord). Study religious books in the interval. Only advanced aspirants can meditate for a long time. Watch the mind and cultivate dispassion. Energy will leak out through the senses if you are careless and nonvigilant. If energy leaks out? you cannot have good meditation. Dispassion is indifference to sensual enjoyments herein and hereafter? absence of desire for visible and invisible objects. You must have steady? lasting and sustained dispassion. It should not wane. It should be a constant attitude of the mind. You must be fully established in dispassion.In doing the Anushthana for 40 days live on milk and fruits or light diet. Take only 3 or 4 articles of food. Take one meal only. Sleep on the floor. Observe celibacy and the vow of silence. Do not come out of the room. Speak little if you do not observe perfect silence. Do the Anushthana on the banks of the Ganga or any sacred river. Try to do one or several Purascharanas of your Ishta Mantra. If there are five letters (syllables in English) in the Mantra? 500?000 repetitions of the Mantra will constitute one Purascharana.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Enjoying solitude, abstemiousness, his body, mind and speech under perfect control, absorbed in meditation, he becomes free - always filled with the spirit of renunciation.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Dwelling in solitude, eating sparingly, with speech, body, and mind controlled, ever engaged in the Yoga of meditation, and taking refuge in dispassion. Commentary: Solitude here means a place with minimal external distractions. Moderate eating (Laghvashi) prevents lethargy and keeps the intellect sharp. Restraining body, speech, and mind facilitates inner control. Dhyana-yoga is directing the mind to the Supreme Reality to quieten its outgoing tendencies, which must be supported by true dispassion (Vairagya) — the natural falling away of lower desires as the mind evolves.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Who enjoys solitude, eats lightly, has controlled his speech-organ, body and mind; who is permanently devoted to the meditation-Yoga; and who has taken shelter in the perennial desirelessness;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Resorting to solitude, eating but little, restraining speech, body and mind, ever engaged in the Yoga of meditation and taking refuge in dispassion;

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
One who resorts to solitude, eats sparingly, has speech, body and mind under control, to whom meditation and concentration are ever the highest (duty), and who is possessed of dispassion;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Repairing to solitary places like forests or caves, eating moderately (which removes sleep and laziness), subduing speech, body, and mind, constantly devoted to meditation on the Self, and fully established in dispassion toward all seen and unseen enjoyments...

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Dwelling in solitude, eating sparingly, with speech, body and mind subdued, always engaged in the yoga of meditation, and taking refuge in dispassion...

Commentary: Living in a quiet place free from distractions helps in quietening the mind. Abstemiousness in eating prevents sleepiness and lethargy. The seeker subdues his speech, body, and mind, redirecting all energies toward spiritual contemplation. He maintains a constant attitude of dispassion, which means detachment from all material luxuries and sensory desires.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Endowed with a purified understanding' means endowed with the Buddhi capable of understanding the self as it is in reality; 'subduing the mind by steadiness' means making the mind fit for meditation by turning away from external and internal objects; 'relinishing sound and other objects of senses' means keeping them far away, casting aside love and hate occasioned by them (i.e., the sense objects).

'Resorting to solitude' means living in a lonely place free from hindrances to meditation; 'eat but little' means eating neither too much nor too little; 'restraining speech, body and mind' means directing the operations of body, speech and mind to meditation; 'ever engaged in the Yoga of meditation' means being like this, i.e., constantly engaged in the Yoga of meditation day after day until death; 'taking refuge in dispassion' means developing aversion to all objects except the one entity to be meditated upon, by considering the imperfections of all objects and thus cultivating detachment to everything.

Forsaking 'egoism' means abandoning the tendency to consider what is other than the self, as well as neutralising the power of forcible Vasnas (tendencies) which nourish (egoism), and the resulting pride, desire, wrath and possessiveness. 'With no feeling of mine' means free from the notion that what does not belong to oneself belongs to oneself; 'Who is tranil' means, who finds sole happiness in experiencing the self. One who has become like this and performs the Yoga of meditation becomes worthy for the state of Brahman. The meaning is that, freed from all bonds, he experiences the self as It really is.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Vivikta-sevi, one who resorts to solitude, is habituated to repairing into such solitary places as a forest, bank of a river, mountain caves, etc.; laghuasi, eats sparingly, is habituated to eating a little-repairing to solitary places and eating sparingly are nentioned here since they are the causes of tranillity of mind through the elimination of defects like sleep etc.-; the person steadfast in Knowledge, yata-vak-kaya-manasah, who has speech, body and mind under control. Having all his organs withdrawn thus, dhyana-yoga-parah nityam, one to whom meditation and concentration are ever the highest (duty)-meditation is thinking of the real nature of the Self, and concentration is making the mind one-pointed with regard to the Self itself; one to whom these meditation and concentration are the highest (duty) is dhyana-yoga-parah-. Nityam, (ever) is used to indicate the absence of other duties like repetition of mantra [A formula of prayer sacred to any deity.-V.S.A.] etc.
Samupasritah, one who is fully possessed, i.e. ever possessed; of vairagyam, dispassion, absence of longing for objects seen or unseen-.
Further,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Enjoying solitude, eating sparingly, subduing the body, mind, and speech, ever devoted to the meditation-Yoga, and taking refuge in dispassion...

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Dwelling in solitary places free from distractions, eating sparingly (which prevents sleep and lethargy), subduing speech, body, and mind, always devoted to meditation (making the mind one-pointed in Brahman), and taking refuge in dispassion toward all seen and unseen enjoyments...

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Dwelling in solitude, eating sparingly, subduing the speech, body, and mind, ever engaged in the Yoga of meditation, and taking refuge in dispassion...

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Dwelling in solitary places like forests or caves, eating sparingly (which removes sleep and lethargy), subduing speech, body, and mind, ever engaged in meditation and concentration on the Self, and fully possessed of dispassion...

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Dwelling in a quiet place free from obstacles to meditation, eating in moderation (neither too much nor too little), directing the activities of body, speech, and mind to meditation, constantly engaged in meditation until death, and cultivating dispassion toward all objects except the one meditated upon...

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Dwelling in solitude, eating sparingly, subduing the speech, body, and mind, ever engaged in the Yoga of meditation, and taking refuge in dispassion...

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Dwelling in solitude, eating sparingly, subduing speech, body and mind, ever devoted to the yoga of meditation, and taking refuge in dispassion...

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Living in solitude, eating lightly, controlling the mind, speech, and body, always absorbed in meditation and detached.

 When one is purified by intelligence, he keeps himself in the mode of goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in trance. He is not attached to the objects of sense gratification, and he is free from attachment and hatred in his activities. Such a detached person naturally prefers to live in a secluded place, he does not eat more than what he requires, and he controls the activities of his body and mind. He has no false ego because he does not accept the body as himself. Nor has he a desire to make the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things. Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. He is satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of the Lord, and he is never angry in the absence of sense gratification. Nor does he endeavor to acquire sense objects. Thus when he is completely free from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all material things, and that is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage is called the brahma-bhūta stage. When one is free from the material conception of life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated. This is described in Bhagavad-gītā (2.70) : āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī “A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires – that enter like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but is always still – can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.”