Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yasmānnodvijate loko lokānnodvijate ca yaḥ .
harṣāmarṣabhayodvegairmukto yaḥ sa ca me priyaḥ

Word Meanings:
यस्मात् - for whom
न - not
उद्विजते - is agitated
लोकः - the world
लोकात् - from the world
न - not
उद्विजते - is agitated
च - and
यः - who
हर्षामर्षभयोद्वेगैः - by joy
मुक्तः - freed
यः - who
सः - he
च - and
मे - to Me
प्रियः - dear.

Life Application:
Do not disturb the world, and let not the world disturb you; be free from excitement, anger, fear, and anxiety.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He by whom no person (i.e. living being, individual) is agitated, and who himself is not agitated by any person, and who is free from joy, intolerance, fear, and anxiety—that devotee is dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He by whom the world is not agitated and who cannot be agitated by the world, and who is freed from joy, anger, fear and anxiety  he is dear to Me.

यस्मात् for whom? न not? उद्विजते is agitated? लोकः the world? लोकात् from the world? न not? उद्विजते is agitated? च and? यः who? हर्षामर्षभयोद्वेगैः by (from) joy? wrath? fear and anxiety? मुक्तः freed? यः who? सः he? च and? मे to Me? प्रियः dear.Commentary Harsha Joy? exhilaration of the mind when one obtains an object of desire. This is indicated by hair standing on end? tears flowing down the face? etc.Amarsha Anger. Some say that it is a mixture of jealousy and anger.Udvega Anxiety? worry? sorrow? discomfiture.The knower of Brahman or the devotee of the Lord never injures any creature in thought? word and deed. He gives security of life to all creatures. Therefore? no creature is afraid of him. The sage feels that the world is his body? his own Self. How can he be afraid of the world then He never hurts others and is not hurt by the words or deeds of others.The mental modifications of joy? envy? fear and anxiety leave the sage or devotee of their own accord? just as the beasts and birds leave the forest when it is on fire.Such a sage or devotee is dear to Me. How can I describe him

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
He who does not harm the world, and whom the world cannot harm, who is not carried away by any impulse of joy, anger or fear, such a one is My beloved.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In this verse, which forms the second part of this section, three more characteristics of a wise devotee are described. He by whom the world is not agitated — a wise man is one who does not cause any kind of disturbance or anxiety in the world. Just as darkness cannot remain where there is the sun, similarly, where a wise devotee established in peace and bliss resides, the question of restlessness and sadness simply does not arise. Around him, such an atmosphere of peace, love, and joy is created that even an agitated and unhappy person, coming into his presence, is influenced by that great soul, forgets his sorrow, and experiences peace. The truth is that the entire world runs to that saint as if drawn by a spell, only to experience his wisdom and joy within themselves. And who is not agitated by anyone — not only does he bestow peace upon everyone, but he also does not lose his own peace and joy under any circumstances. No situation in the world can agitate him. Even in the presence of external disorder, opposition, and rebellious people full of revenge, no disturbance occurs in his mind. This world of material objects is always changing, and the dance of death, which generally bewilders and saddens everyone, cannot disturb the peace of mind of the saint even in the slightest. It is as if he is made of a stronger metal, and his life is built on a solid foundation. Many logs of wood float and drift here and there on the surface of the sea, but a lighthouse built on the firm foundation of sea rocks stands motionless and straight, watching the rising and falling tides of the sea. The personality of a wise man, being established in the realization of the Truth which is the substratum of life, is never shaken by the superficial circumstances of life, because there is no attachment to anything in his mind. Even amidst conflicting situations, within and without, he sees an eternal, changeless substratum, and even in the discordant notes produced by man in the pure music of nature, he hears only a steady and pure note. He is free from joy, impatience, fear, and anxiety. Thus, the devotee who always experiences peace with himself and also with the world, who rules over circumstances and does not become their victim, and who has transcended the vices and reactions of an ordinary human being — such a devotee is dear to Me. The Lord speaks further on this topic:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
He, on account of whom the world does not get agitated; who too does not feel agitated on account of  the world; who is free from joy and  impatience, fear and anxiety-he is dear to Me.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He from whom the world has no cause to be frightened, who is not frightened by the world, who is free from joy and impatience, fear and repulsion - he is dear to me.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
He, too, owing to whom the world is not disturbed, and who is not disturbed by the world, who is free from joy, impatience, fear and anxiety, is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He says 'yasmāt' to state that freedom from anxiety/agitation etc. is also an attribute of a wise man. By the word 'tathā' he says that for a monk, not only is being the cause of agitation to the world improper, but also being the experiencer of agitation caused by the world. Intolerance towards the progress of others is the implied meaning of 'amarsha'. Fright caused by seeing thieves etc. is 'bhaya' (fear). 'Udvega' (distress/agitation) is the state of being anxious due to helplessness before the world which is composed of sentient and insentient entities.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He by whom no creature is agitated and who itself is not agitated by any creature, and who is free from joy, impatience (jealousy), fear and anxiety, is dear to Me.

Commentary—'yasmān nodvijate lokaḥ'—A devotee sees only his beloved Lord everywhere and in everyone. Therefore, in his view, all actions performed through mind, speech, and body are solely for the pleasure of the Lord (Gita 6.31). In such a state, how can a devotee cause agitation to any creature? Yet, it is seen in the lives of devotees that due to their glory, honor, and sometimes their actions, or even just their serene appearance, some people become agitated out of jealousy and start showing malice and opposition towards them without any reason.

If we consider the agitation caused to people by a devotee, it will be understood that the actions of a devotee are never the cause of anyone's agitation; because the devotee sees only God in all creatures—'Vāsudevaḥ sarvam' (Gita 7.19). All his actions are naturally for the supreme welfare of living beings. Even by mistake, he never attempts to do harm to anyone. Those who feel agitated by him do so because of their own passionate and hateful demoniac nature. Due to their own flawed nature, even the beneficial actions of the devotee seem troublesome to them. What is the fault of the devotee in this? Bhartrihari says: 'mṛgamiinasajjanānāṁ tṛṇajalasantoṣavihitavṛttīnām. lubdhakadhīvarapiśunā niṣkāraṇavairiṇo jagati.' (Bhartrihari Niti Shataka 61) 'Deer, fish, and virtuous men maintain their lives on grass, water, and contentment respectively (without harming anyone); yet hunters, fishermen, and wicked people become their enemies in the world without any reason.'

In reality, the question of other men being agitated by devotees does not arise at all. On the contrary, we find instances in the lives of devotees where even those who hated them abandoned their demoniac nature and became devotees under the influence of their contemplation, association, sight, touch, and conversation. The reason for this is the generous nature of the devotees: 'umā santa kai ihai baḍāī. manda karata jo karai bhalāī.' (Ramacharitamanas 5.41.4) 'O Uma, this is the greatness of saints, that they do good even to those who do them harm.' However, it is not a rule that everyone who hates a devotee will surely benefit.

If it were assumed that no one is ever agitated by a devotee, or that others do not make any attempt against him, or that the devotee has no enemies or friends, then the statement about being equal to enemies and friends, honor and dishonor, praise and blame (which is mentioned later in the 18th and 19th verses) would not have been made. The point is that due to their demoniac nature, people can feel agitated even by the beneficial actions of a devotee, and out of a spirit of revenge, they may act against him and consider themselves his enemy; but in the eyes of the devotee, there is neither any enemy nor any intention to agitate anyone.

'lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ'—First, the Lord stated that no creature is agitated by the devotee, and now by these words He shows that the devotee himself is also not agitated by any creature. There are two reasons for this: (1) Actions and events contrary to the devotee's body, mind, senses, principles, etc., may occur due to past destiny or the will of others. However, having realized the ultimate Truth and possessing intense love for God, the devotee remains so absorbed in divine love that he perceives God everywhere and in everyone. Therefore, in the actions of all creatures (even if some are adverse to him), he sees only the play (līlā) of the Lord. Hence, he is never agitated by any action. (2) A person gets agitated by others only when his desires, beliefs, spiritual practice, concepts, etc., are opposed. A devotee is completely fulfilled and free of desire (pūrṇakāma). Therefore, there is no reason for him to be agitated by others.

'harṣāmarṣabhayodvegair mukto yaḥ sa ca me priyaḥ'—Here, being free from joy (harṣa) means that the perfected devotee is completely free from all types of modifications like joy, etc. But this does not mean that the perfected devotee is devoid of happiness (devoid of joy); rather, his happiness is eternal, uniform, extraordinary, and transcendental. Indeed, his happiness is not temporary, destructible, or fluctuating, arising from the contact or separation of worldly objects. Because of having the intellect fixed in God everywhere, he remains always happy simply by seeing his chosen Deity, the Lord, and His plays.

Not being able to bear the excellence (progress) of someone is called 'amarṣa' (intolerance/jealousy). Seeing other people get comfort, wealth, education, glory, honor, etc., equal to or more than oneself, an ordinary man starts feeling jealous of them; because he cannot tolerate the excellence of others.

Sometimes, even in the hearts of some spiritual practitioners (sādhakas), a little feeling of jealousy arises upon seeing or hearing about the spiritual progress and happiness of other practitioners. But a devotee is completely free from this defect because, in his eyes, there is no independent existence of anyone other than his beloved Lord. Then against whom should he feel intolerance, and why?

If a feeling arises in the heart of a practitioner, upon seeing the spiritual progress of others, that 'may I also achieve similar spiritual progress', then this feeling is helpful in his spiritual practice. But if a feeling arises in the heart of the practitioner like 'why did he progress?', then due to such a bad feeling, the emotion of intolerance (amarṣa) will arise in his heart, which will lead him towards downfall.

The agitation caused by the apprehension of separation from the desired object and contact with the undesired is called 'bhaya' (fear). Fear is caused by two reasons: (1) due to external causes; such as fear arising from the apprehension of harm from lions, snakes, thieves, dacoits, etc., or some kind of worldly loss, and (2) due to internal causes; such as fear arising from thoughts and conducts contrary to scriptures like theft, lying, deceit, adultery, etc.

The greatest fear is that of death. Even men reputed to be wise generally retain the fear of death. A practitioner also often fears the emaciation of the body due to spiritual practices like association with saints, chanting, meditation, etc. Sometimes he also fears how his body and family will be maintained when he develops complete dispassion towards the world! An ordinary man fears someone stronger than himself who obstructs the attainment of favorable things. All these fears arise only from identification with the body (matter). A devotee is completely dependent on the feet of God; therefore, he is always free from fear. A practitioner also remains in fear only as long as he does not surrender completely to the feet of God.

To a perfected devotee, only the play of his beloved Lord is visible always and everywhere. Then how can the play of the Lord generate fear in his heart! The mind losing its one-pointedness and becoming agitated is called 'udvega' (anxiety/agitation). In this (fifteenth) verse, the word 'udvega' appears three times. The first time, by mentioning 'udvega', the Lord showed that no action of the devotee becomes a cause of agitation for any human being. The second time, by mentioning 'udvega', it is shown that the devotee's mind is not agitated by any action of other men. Besides these, a person can get agitated due to several other reasons: such as failing to complete his work despite repeated attempts, not getting the desired result of his work, involuntary weather changes, occurrence of painful events like earthquakes, floods, etc., or obstruction in his desires, beliefs, principles, or spiritual practice. The devotee is completely free from all these types of agitations—to state this, the word 'udvega' has been mentioned the third time. The meaning is that there remains no such thing as 'anxiety/agitation' in the heart of the devotee.

Ignorant desire and demoniac nature are the causes of agitation. Since ignorance is completely absent in a devotee, he has no independent desire; moreover, the demoniac nature is destroyed during the stage of spiritual practice itself. The will of God is the devotee's will. A devotee sees only the merciful dispensation of God in the results of his actions or in the favorable or unfavorable situations obtained involuntarily, and remains constantly immersed in bliss. Hence, there is a complete absence of agitation in the devotee.

The word 'muktaḥ' means completely freed from modifications (defects). Worldly modifications like joy, impatience, fear, anxiety, etc., arise because of the respect for the world in the intellect, i.e., not applying the mind and intellect fully in God. But in the devotee's view, since there is no independent existence and importance of anything other than God, these modifications do not arise in him at all. Virtues and good conduct reside in him naturally. In this verse, the Lord has used the word 'muktaḥ' instead of 'bhaktaḥ'. The significance is that a devotee is completely free from all vices and bad conduct.

Due to pride in virtues, vices come in automatically. If, upon the arrival of a virtue in oneself, the vice of pride arises, then how can that virtue be considered a virtue? Demoniac qualities (vices) can never arise from divine qualities (virtues). If divine qualities could produce demoniac qualities, then according to the Lord's words, 'daivī saṁpad vimokṣāya' (Gita 16.5), how would a human being become liberated? In reality, in the pride of virtues, virtue is less and vice (pride) is more. Pride increases vices because all vices and bad conducts depend on pride.

A devotee is generally not even aware that there is any virtue in him. Even if he ever sees any virtue in himself, he attributes it to God, not to himself. Thus, because of the absence of pride in virtues, the devotee is free from all vices, bad conduct, and modifications. To a devotee, God is dear, therefore to God also the devotee is dear (Gita 7.17). Relation—The third section describing the six characteristics of a perfected devotee is presented in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
That person who is engaged in Karma Yoga does not become the cause of 'fear to the world'; he does nothing to cause fear to the world. He has no cause to 'fear the world,' i.e., no action on the part of others can cause him fear because of the certainty that he is not inimical to the world. Therefore he is not in the habit of showing favour towards someone and intolerance towards others; he has no fear of some or repulsion for others. Such a person is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 12.15–12.20 jointly): Yasmat  etc. upto  Me priyah.   One who has no fixed thought :  One who has no resolution,  [in his mundane life] like  'This alone must be done by me'.  He, who enjoys, with contentment, both pleasure and pain as they come, and has his mind completely absorbed in Supreme Lord - that person happily (or easily)  attains the Supreme Isolation (Emancipation)

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sah ca, he too; yasmat, owing to whom owing to which monk; lokah, the world; na udvijate, is not disturbed, not afflicted, not agitated; so also, yah na udvijate, he who is not disturbed; lokat, by the world; muktah, who is free; harsa-amarsa-bhaya-udvegaih, from joy, impatience, fear and anxiety;-harsa is elation of the mind on aciring a thing dear to oneself, and is manifested as horripillation, shedding of tears, etc.; amarsa is non-forbearance; bhaya is fright; udvega is distress; he who is free from them-, is priyah, dear; me, to Me.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Moreover, regarding 'yasmāt': The world is not agitated by the devotee who is devoted to the action of serving the Lord, due to his friendliness and efforts to refine/purify his own conduct. And he himself is not agitated by the world, even by those who are averse to proper conduct; rather, he remains firmly established in his own duty (svadharma). Similarly, joy (harṣa) upon obtaining what is desired, intolerance (amarṣa) upon not obtaining it, fear (bhaya) from some source, and anxiety or distress (udvega) under unfavorable circumstances—one who is free from all these, like Prahlada, that devotee is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He states further attributes of that same devotee—'yasmāt...' Because of the sannyasi (monk) who grants fearlessness to all living beings, no person in the world is agitated or distressed; and who is not agitated by the world, i.e., even by wicked people whose sole vow is to harass innocent people, due to his vision of non-duality (advaita) and his extremely compassionate and forgiving nature. Furthermore, 'harṣa' (joy) is a specific modification of the mind which manifests bliss upon obtaining what is dear, causing horripilation, shedding tears, etc.; 'amarṣa' (intolerance) is a specific mental modification in the form of inability to bear the progress/excellence of others; 'bhaya' (fear) is terror, a specific mental modification caused by seeing tigers, etc.; and 'udvega' (anxiety/agitation) is a specific mental modification of the nature of distress, such as, 'How shall I live alone in a solitary place, completely devoid of all possessions?' One who is free from these—joy, intolerance, fear, and anxiety—meaning, due to his realization of non-duality, these emotions themselves have left him as they are incompatible with his state, rather than him having to make an effort to discard them. As before, the words 'My devotee' are carried over. Such a devotee of Mine is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Moreover: Owing to whom the world (people) does not experience agitation due to the fear of harm; and who is not agitated by the world; and who is free from the natural emotions of joy etc. Among these, 'harṣa' (joy) is the enthusiasm/elation on obtaining one's desired object; 'amarṣa' (intolerance) is the inability to tolerate the gains of others; 'bhaya' is fright (fear); 'udvega' (anxiety) is the agitation of the mind caused by fear etc. My devotee who is freed from these is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He characterizes the same devotee with other attributes. Owing to which wise sannyasi (monk) the world (all people) does not experience agitation, affliction, or disturbance; and who is not agitated by the world. And therefore who is free from joy, intolerance, fear, and anxiety. 'Harṣa' (joy) is the elation of the mind upon obtaining what is dear, characterized by horripilation, shedding tears, etc.; 'amarṣa' (intolerance) is the non-forbearance when one's desire is obstructed; 'bhaya' (fear) is the fright caused by seeing tigers, etc.; 'udvega' (anxiety) is the agitation of the mind even when scolded or beaten by wicked people. He who is free from these is dear to My.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Now, by the verse beginning with 'yasmāt', He prescribes the quality of renouncing actions that cause agitation/distress to the world, which is the fruit of freedom from possessiveness (nirmamatva) etc., and shows his union with its result. To remove the doubt that a different qualified person is being referred to merely due to the repetition of the word 'yah', the commentary says 'yasmāt karmanishṭhāt' (from the one established in karma yoga). Since the removal of agitation present in the world cannot be directly enjoined upon the karma-yogi (as it depends on others), what is intended to be prescribed is the cessation of his own actions that cause agitation. To show this, he (Ramanuja) says: 'He who does nothing to cause agitation...' Even if there is no direct harm, agitation can be caused to the world merely by vulgar speech, etc. Keeping this in view, the word 'kiñcid api' (even the slightest) is used. By this, the difference of this verse from what was previously stated in 'adveṣṭā...' (12.13) and what will be stated later in 'samaḥ śatrau ca...' (12.18) is established. In the phrase 'lokāt na udvijate ca yaḥ' (who is not agitated by the world), the significance lies in the absence of any cause (for him to be agitated), otherwise it would lead to repetition with what comes before and after. Since in this very verse, freedom from agitation is prescribed in 'harṣāmarṣabhayodvegair muktaḥ', to avoid repetition and show a different aspect from 'yasmāt na udvijate', he (Ramanuja) says 'yam uddiśya' (referring to whom). To show what is enjoined here, since the cessation of agitation-causing actions of the world is not under his control, the reason for the world not performing such actions (towards him) is stated as 'sarva' (due to the certainty of his being non-inimical to all). The meaning is that the one established in karma yoga should behave in such a way that the world realizes he is entirely free from enmity towards all. To show the distinction of joy (harṣa) etc. here from what will be said in 'yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi' (12.17), owing to differences in their objects and causes of cessation, he (Ramanuja) says: 'Therefore, towards someone...' 'Atah eva' (therefore) means because of the absence of distinguishing causes such as benefit or harm received. Regarding 'kañcana prati udvegena', since fear (bhaya) etc., are mentioned separately, here 'udvega' (agitation) refers to action resulting from fear, or disgust/repulsion. Summarizing the meaning of the three statements beginning with 'yasmāt na udvijate', he says: 'One who is of this nature (evambhūtaḥ).' To show that 'even by the mere cessation of actions causing agitation to the world, even if the host of qualities like friendliness and compassion mentioned in the previous verse are absent, I am pleased', it is said 'sah ca' (he too). Thus he says: 'so'pi iti' (he too).

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover: He says 'yasmāt...'. Owing to whom the world is not agitated, i.e., the world does not suffer distress through motivated worship, etc., as in the case of Dhruva, etc. And who is not agitated by, i.e., does not feel fear from, the world, which is making efforts like severe penances to displace or overthrow him. And who is free from joy, impatience, fear, and anxiety. 'Harṣa' (joy) is caused by obtaining one's desired object; since he is free from that (conditioned joy), and because he perceives everything as nondifferent from the Lord without any other manifestation, he is always of the nature of bliss itself; 'amarṣa' (intolerance) is the inability to bear the progress of others; being free from it means he possesses the knowledge that everything is the play (līlā) of the Lord; 'bhaya' (fear) is terror; being free from it means he has the knowledge of the Lord's power to protect; 'udvega' (agitation) is the distraction/perturbation of the mind; being free from it means he is free from mental restlessness during service (sevā) etc. One who is of this nature is dear to Me.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
That devotee who is free from egoism is of two kinds: one established in absorption (samādhi-stha) and one who has arisen from absorption (vyutthita). He states their characteristics in order through two verses, starting with 'yasmāt'. Owing to whom, because of being established in absorption and thus resembling a dry block of wood, the world is not agitated, i.e., does not feel frightened. And who is not agitated by the world due to his state of being beyond the mind (nirmanaskatva). Therefore: 'harṣa' (joy) is the exultation of the mind upon gaining what is desired; 'amarṣa' is impatience/non-forbearance; 'bhaya' (fear) is the apprehension of one's own destruction; 'udvega' (anxiety) is the distress caused by that. He is naturally freed or abandoned by these (emotions) solely because of his state of being beyond the mind, rather than having to make an effort to abandon them like a striving practitioner (sādhaka). Such a devotee of Mine is dear to Me.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
He by whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by anyone, who is equipoised in happiness and distress, fear and anxiety, is very dear to Me.

 A few of a devotee’s qualifications are further being described. No one is put into difficulty, anxiety, fearfulness or dissatisfaction by such a devotee. Since a devotee is kind to everyone, he does not act in such a way as to put others into anxiety. At the same time, if others try to put a devotee into anxiety, he is not disturbed. It is by the grace of the Lord that he is so practiced that he is not disturbed by any outward disturbance. Actually because a devotee is always engrossed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and engaged in devotional service, such material circumstances cannot move him. Generally a materialistic person becomes very happy when there is something for his sense gratification and his body, but when he sees that others have something for their sense gratification and he hasn’t, he is sorry and envious. When he is expecting some retaliation from an enemy, he is in a state of fear, and when he cannot successfully execute something he becomes dejected. A devotee who is always transcendental to all these disturbances is very dear to Kṛṣṇa.