Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
na dveṣṭyakuśalaṃ karma kuśale nānuṣajjate .
tyāgī sattvasamāviṣṭo medhāvī chinnasaṃśayaḥ

Word Meanings:
न - not
द्वेष्टि - hates
अकुशलम् - disagreeable
कर्म - action
कुशले - to an agreeable one
न - not
अनुषज्जते - is attached
त्यागी - the abandoner
सत्त्वसमाविष्टः - pervaded by purity
मेधावी - intelligent
छिन्नसंशयः - with his doubts cut

Life Application:
The relinquisher in goodness, intelligent, doubts dispelled, hates not disagreeable work nor clings to agreeable.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The person endowed with Sattva, who does not hate disagreeable (inauspicious) action and is not attached to agreeable (auspicious) action, is free from doubt, wise (enlightened), and a true abandoner.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The man of renunciation, pervaded by purity, intelligent, and with his doubts cut asunder, does not hate a disagreeable work nor is he attached to an agreeable one.

न not? द्वेष्टि hates? अकुशलम् disagreeable? कर्म action? कुशले to an agreeable one? न not? अनुषज्जते is attached? त्यागी the abandoner? सत्त्वसमाविष्टः pervaded by purity? मेधावी intelligent? छिन्नसंशयः with his doubts cut asunder.Commentary All actions are eally welcome to the man of renunciation. He is not affected by either pleasure or pain. He is not elated at performing pleasant actions nor does he find unpleasantness when he does disagreeable actions. He does not hate the latter? nor is he attached to the former. Neither has he aversion to painful actions nor attraction to pleasant ones. As he has no attachment to any action or its rewards? he will do any action for the welfare of all beings.Akusalam Karma Disagreeable work or work done with expectation of reward? which becomes the cause of bondage to Samsara? by producing a body. He does not hate an unpleasnt action? thinking? Of what use is itKusale To good ones which include obligatory daily duties. He has no attachment to them even with the notion that they lead to salvation by purifying the heart and conseently giving rise to the dawn of knowledge and devotion to it.When one abandons attachment to action and desire for its reward and performs actions vigorously? his heart is filled with Sattva or purity which produces discrimination between the Real and the unreal? the Eternal and the transient. Then he attains knowledge of the Self which dispels all the doubts caused by ignorance. He now realises that the only means of attaining the spureme bliss or eternal peace or immortality is knowledge of the Self. This rends asunder all his doubts. What is the nature of doubt Does Brahman exist or not Do the Upanishads deal with Saguna Brahman or Nirguna Brahman Is the individual soul identical with the Supreme Being or not Will I be able to realise the Self or not Will any of the Karmas (Prarabdha? Sanchita and Agami) affect me Does this Samsara whose nature is the feelings I do this and I enjoy this belong to the Self or to the mind and intellect What are the means for liberation -- Yoga? devotion? Karma or knowledge of the Self What is Moksha Is it Selfrealisation or the attainment of the Salokya? Samipya? Sarupya and Sayujya states (dwelling in the kingdom of God? proximity to Him? assuming the same form as the Lord and merging in Him)When a man practises Karma Yoga he gets purity of heart and through purity of heart knows himself to be the immutable actionless Self Who is destitute of birth? or remains without acting or causing others to act (Cf.V.13). He attains devotion to the knowledge of the Self and freedom from all actions. The purpose of the Karma Yoga described above has been taught in this verse.Medhavi He who is endowed or united with wisdom. He is a Sthitaprajna. What is Medha? then It is the immediate knowledge of the identity of the individual soul and the Supreme Being by meditation on the right significance of the great sentence (I am Brahman or That thou art)? which,is free from the three kinds of doubts? viz.? Samsaya Bhavana (doubt)? Asambhavana (improbability) and Viparitabhavana (perversion)? and by the practice of the four means and service of the Guru (who is versed in the scriptures and established in Brahman) and hearing the truths from him.Such a Medhavi will not think that prohibited actions which bind an ignorant man will be unfavourable to him. He will never think that they will bind him if he has to perform them? because he is above good and evil? virtue and vice? right and wrong. He has no idea of agency (Kartritva Abhimana) he feels that he is a Kritakritya? one who has accomplished all actions.This does not mean that he will do wrong actions. As his will is one with the cosmic will? whatever action he performs will be in accordance with the scriptures. He will never deviate even a fraction of an inch from the rules of the scriptures. The Lord alone works through his mind and senses as he has no individual will.RagaDvesha (likes and dislikes) are the motives that induce a worldly man to actions. As they are absent in a sage or a Medhavi? he can renounce the fruits of all actions and actions as well.As the ocean remains calm amidst stormy waves? even so a Sattvic man remains calm amidst adverse or stormy conditions of life. He recognises that the happenings of life are inevitable. He acts in a variety of ways but is not disturbed as he has a balanced and disciplined mind.There must be no hatred for unpleasant or disagreeable action that brings physical suffering? danger or unlucky results or untoward conseences? when it is the work that should be done. You will have to accept such work also with a willing heart and work with hear and soul. You must have a profound and comprehensive understanding of its need and meaning also. Arjuna failed to understand in the beginning the deep significance and need of the work given by the Lord. He brought in his own foolish philosophy. He failed to do his bounden duty because? due to ignorance? he thought it was an unpleasant or disagreeable action to kill people but in the end when his eyes were opened by the valuable teachings of the Lord? he understood the need and the meaning of the work although it appeared to him as disagreeable and unpleasant in the beginning? and said My illusion is destroyed. I have gained knowledge through Thy grace? O Krishna. I am firm? my doubts are gone. I will act according to Thy instructions.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The wise man who has attained purity, whose doubts are solved, who is filled with the spirit of self-abnegation, does not shrink from action because it brings pain, nor does he desire it because it brings pleasure.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In the previous verse, Lord Krishna stated that a Sattvik person performs his obligatory duties, understanding them solely as duty, renouncing attachment to the fruit. At first sight, this principle of abandonment will seem impossible to an ordinary person. Probably seeing a similar expression of surprise on Arjuna's face, Lord Krishna portrays the Sattvik person more clearly in this verse. Common ignorant people are of an extreme nature. They never see the world in its true form. They look at the objects of the world with a vision colored by their likes and dislikes (raga and dvesha). Thereafter, they try to obtain what is pleasant to them and labor to abandon what is unpleasant. For this, they do not care about auspicious or inauspicious actions. They become attached to the action that brings them the pleasant object, and hate other actions. As a result of this, they experience extreme joy upon obtaining the desired, and fall into the pit of grief upon obtaining the undesired. Defects like lust, anger, jealousy, etc., permanently reside in the hearts of such people. Sometimes when one of these individuals engages in righteous conduct, due to his extreme nature he becomes attached to religious acts and looks down upon others as fallen; however, a person of Sattvik temperament is free from all the above-mentioned defects. The reason for this is his developed power of discrimination (viveka). Through discrimination between the Self and the not-Self (Atma-Anatma), he knows very well that the body, senses, mind, and intellect are all not-Self, and birth-death, hunger-thirst, and grief-delusion are all their attributes, not of the witnessing Self which illumines them all. Due to this knowledge, he does not identify with the non-Self limitations (upadhis). This is stated here by saying that he does not hate the inauspicious nor does he attach himself to the auspicious. Such a man alone is truly called well-educated and cultured. Other undiscriminating people wander here and there like a dry leaf along with the motion and direction of the wind. The wise person remains as the witness of his mind, whereas the unwise, in the absence of abandonment, suffer by identifying with the modifications of their mind. To understand the true nature of any object and to abandon the false, the knowledge of one's eternal and complete nature is necessary. This capacity of the intellect to understand things and reason logically is called the power of Medha. Not only this, but the capacity to retain the acquired knowledge and recall it as needed is also Medha. A person endowed with this power is called wise (medhavi). Such a wise person has clear knowledge of the following elements: (1) his field of action, (2) the limitations (upadhis) through which he contacts the world, (3) his nature of pure bliss, and (4) his relationship with the world. This wise person is free from doubts (chinnasamsayah), because doubt can arise only from incomplete knowledge of an object, not otherwise. There is no doubt that such Sattvik abandoners are rare in the world. The majority of people identify with their body and other limitations, consider themselves the doers of action, and then they are inevitably bound to experience the fruits of action. The ignorant person who cannot abandon the conceit of agency and attachment to the body should at least abandon the fruit of action. The Lord says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The man of relinishment, who is well possessed of the Sattva, is wise and has his doubts destroyed-he hates not the unskilled action and clings not to the skilled action.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
One who has abandoned, who is imbued with Sattva, who is wise, whose doubts have been dispelled - such a person hates not disagreeable acts nor clings to agreeable ones.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The man of renunciation who has become imbued with sattva, who is wise and freed from doubts, does not hate unbefitting action, nor does he become attached to befitting activity.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having thus refuted the contradiction between the preceding and succeeding statements, he states the purpose of the subsequent verse: "He however...". By the word "etc." in "attachment to fruits etc.", attachment to the nature of action itself is included; "the internal organ being untainted" is the split of the words. Raising the question, "What happens when the internal organ is pure?", he says: "when it is pure...". The distinction is that "purity" means freedom from impurities, and "tranquillity" means being refined. By "gradually", it means through the repetition of hearing (shravana) etc. By "steadfastness in it", steadfastness in the knowledge of the Self is meant. Regarding desire-oriented action, he shows dislike by its being fit to be abandoned: "What is...". After stating in general that "he does not entertain hatred or love for either", he specifically indicates the doer through a question: "Who, again...?". He describes the renouncer who is called "tyagi": "in the manner stated above...". That is to say, by renouncing attachment to action and its fruit. He explains that very renouncer: "he who performs daily obligatory duties...". The connection is with "renouncing their fruits". He does not hate desire-oriented or prohibited actions thinking "they are causes of bondage"; nor does he rejoice in daily and occasional duties thinking "they are causes of Liberation". He asks about the specific time of this state: "When...?". In one whose sins have been destroyed by daily and other actions performed without desire for fruits, the Sattva, which is the capacity to grasp things as they really are, is awakened; and by that, at the time of absorption (samavesha), the absence of the said love and hatred occurs. To explain this he says: "When...". By "for this very reason" (ata eva), it means because he is absorbed and capable of grasping things as they really are. He explains the state of being freed from doubts: "abiding in the Self...". The construction is that the supreme Goal is the highest Good, and its only means is right Knowledge. He summarizes the meaning stated in the verse "na dveshti..." etc.: "The person competent...". By "in the way described above", it means by renouncing attachment to actions and their fruits. Having his self purified by the performance of the yoga of action, he gradually realizes the immutable Brahman as his own innermost Self through the practice of hearing (shravana) etc. He states the reason for the actionlessness of the Supreme: "devoid of modifications like birth etc." He shows that the one who has the said knowledge attains liberation through the renunciation of all actions: "he, having given up all actions..."

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He who does not hate disagreeable (inauspicious) action and is not attached to agreeable (auspicious) action is an abandoner, wise, free from doubts, and established in his own Self.

Commentary — na dveṣṭyakuśalaṃ karma — Those scripturally ordained auspicious actions which are performed with desire for fruits and which in the end result in rebirth (Gita 2.42-44, 9.20-21), and those scripturally prohibited sinful actions which in the end lead to lower births and hells (Gita 16.7-20), all these actions are called inauspicious (akushala). A practitioner does abandon such inauspicious actions, but not out of hatred. The reason is that by abandoning them out of hatred, the connection with actions is severed, but a connection is established with hatred, which is more terrible than scripturally ordained desire-oriented actions or scripturally prohibited sinful actions.
kuśale nānuṣajjate — Even among scripturally ordained actions, those which are obligatory according to class, station in life, circumstances, etc., and which are performed by renouncing attachment and desire for fruits and which in the end lead to liberation, all such actions are called auspicious (kushala). A practitioner does not become attached to such auspicious actions even while performing them.
tyāgī — He who has no attachment to performing auspicious actions and no hatred towards abandoning inauspicious actions is a real abandoner. But that abandonment is fully accomplished only when performing or not performing actions makes no difference to oneself, i.e., constant unattachment remains (Gita 3.18, 4.18). When this happens, the practitioner becomes established in Yoga (Gita 6.4).
medhāvī — He whose actions are complete in all details and are free from resolve and desire, and who has burnt all actions in the fire of knowledge, is called a sage (wise or intelligent) by the wise (Gita 4.19). Because not being tainted by actions while performing actions is indeed great wisdom. This very wise person is described as the most intelligent among men in the eighteenth verse of the fourth chapter with the words "sa buddhimān manuṣyeṣu".
chinnasaṃśayaḥ — No doubt remains in that abandoner. Due to his being established in non-differentiation from the Truth, there is no possibility of any kind of doubt in him. Doubt remains only where there is incomplete knowledge, i.e., when one knows something and does not know something else.
sattvasamāviṣṭo — By abandoning attachment etc., he automatically gets established in his own nature of consciousness. Therefore, he is called "sattva-samāviṣṭaḥ". This very state is described as being established in Brahman in the nineteenth verse of the fifth chapter with the words "tasmād brahmaṇi te sthitāḥ".
Relationship — Why take so much trouble of having no attachment in performing actions and no hatred in abandoning them? Why not renounce actions altogether? To remove this doubt, the next verse is spoken.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Thus, 'filled with Sattva,' endowed with right knowledge, i.e., with the knowledge of the reality as it is, and as a conseence of it 'having all doubts shattered' - he alone becomes a renouncer of attachment to work and the fruits of work. He 'neither hates works productive of harmful effects,' nor 'loves others productive of worldly prosperity.' Disagreeable acts are fraught with undesirable fruits; and agreeable acts bring about desirable results such as heaven, sons, cows, food etc. On account of his renouncing all results other than the Brahman and on account of his renouncing the sense of agency, he shows neither love nor hatred for above-mentioned types of works. Here 'sinful acts having undesirable fruits' are only such acts as are inadvertently performed. For it has been taught in the Srutis that nor turning away from bad conduct is antagonistic to the production of knowledge. 'But one who has not ceased from bad conduct, who is not tranil, is not composed, is not of peaceful mind, cannot obtain Him by knowledge' (Ka. U., 1.2.24). Thus, 'the abandonment' according to the Sastras is renunciation of the sense of agency, attachment and fruits of actions, and not total relinishment of actions as such.

He explains this further:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.4–18.11 jointly): Niscayam etc.  upto abhidhiyate.  The conclusion here is  this :  Due to the manifoldness of the nature of the Strands, that have been defined earlier, the act of relinishment itself is performed with a certain mental disposition which is a modification of the Sattva, the Rajas and the Tamas (the Strands).  Because it reflects  (is contaminated by)  the nature of the person having the same (the said mental dispositon),  what is called the real (unalloyed)  relinishment is the performance of the actions  by the knowers of the Supreme Brahman by giving up desire to achieve fruits and by avoiding the craving and hatred on account of their eanimity to [the pairs of opposites like]  success and failure etc.  That is why [the Bhagavat] says :  'By the act of relinishment born of the Rajas or of the Tamas  (Strands), no connection with the fruit  [of relinishment] is attained'.  However, for an act of relinishing, born of the Sattva (Strand), there is the fruit in the form of honouring the purport of the scriptures.  The application of the term  'relinishment'  stands to reason, in fact, only in the case of a sage who has relinished his holding on the multitude of the Strands.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Na devesti, he does not hate; akusalam, unbefitting; karma, action, rites and duties meant for desired results-with the idea, 'What is the usefulness of this which is a cause of transmigration through fresh embodiment?' Na anusajjate, he does not become attached to; kusale, befitting activity, daily obligatory duties, by thinking that this is the cause of Liberation by virtue of its being the cause of purification of the mind, rise of Knowledge and steadfastness in it. That is to say, he does not entertain any liking even for it, because he finds no purpose in it.
Who, again, is he? Tyagi, the man of renunciation, who has become so by having given up attachment and rewards of action in the manner stated above. He is a tyagi who performs nityakarmas by relinishing attachment to those acts and (their) results.
Again, it is being stated as to when that person does not hate an unbefitting act and does not become attached to a befitting activity: When he has become sattva-samavistah, imbued with sattva, i.e., when he is filled with, possessed of, sattva, which is the means to the knowledge that discriminates between the Self and the not-Self; and hence medhavi, wise-endowed with intelligence (medha), intuitive experience, characterized as knowledge of the Self; one possessed of that is medhavai (wise)-; and owing to the very fact of being wise, chinnasamsayah, freed from doubts-one whose doubts created by ignorance have been sundered, one who is freed from doubts by his firm conviction that nothing but abiding in the ture nature of the Self is the supreme means to the highest Good.
The person competent (for rites and duties) who, having gradually become purified in mind through the practice of Karma-yoga in the way described above, has realized as his own Self the actionless Self, which is devoid of modifications like birth etc., he, '৷৷.having given up all actions mentally, remaining at without doing or causing (others) to do anything at all' (cf. 5.13), attains steadfastness in Knowledge, which is characterized as 'actionless-ness'. In this way, the purpose of the aforesaid Karma-yoga has been stated through the present verse.
On the other hand, since, for the unenlightened person-who, while being alified (for rites and duties), holds on to the body owing to the erroneous conception that the body is the Self, and who has the firm conviction, 'I am the agent,' because of the persistence of his idea that the Self is the agent-it is not possible to renounce actions totally, therefore he has competence only for performing enjoined duties by giving up fruits of actions. But he is not to renounce them (actions). In order to point out this idea the Lord says:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
He states the characteristics of such a person in: "na dveṣṭi...". The abandoner filled with Sattva, who is wise, does not hate inauspicious action which has undesirable fruit, and does not cling to auspicious action which has desirable fruits like heaven, etc., because he has abandoned all fruits other than the happiness of the Self and has abandoned agency. Here, inauspicious action is spoken of with reference to a negligent person; for it is heard that one who is negligent and has not turned away from bad conduct does not attain the happiness of the Self even through knowledge: "But one who has not ceased from bad conduct, who is not tranquil, who is not composed, or whose mind is not at peace, cannot attain Him even by knowledge" (Katha Upanishad 1.2.24). Therefore, the abandonment of agency, attachment, and fruits in action is the scriptural abandonment, not the abandonment of actions in their physical form. He explains this in: "na hi...". In the sense that actions cannot be abandoned entirely by one who bears a body, the word "śakyam" is an indeclinable. Because actions meant for the maintenance of the body, such as eating, drinking, and their associations, are unavoidable; and for that purpose, actions like the great sacrifices are also unavoidable. Among those, he who is a renouncer of the fruits of sacrifices and other actions — where "fruit" is an implication for agency and possessiveness as well — is called a "tyagi" in scriptural passages like "Through abandonment alone some attained immortality" (Mahanarayana Upanishad 10.5, Kaivalya Upanishad 2).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He states the result of Sattvik abandonment, namely steadfastness in Knowledge through purification of the mind, first: "na dveṣṭi...". That abandoner who is endowed with Sattvik abandonment, who performs ordained actions for the purification of the mind by abandoning attachment to agency and desire for fruits in the manner described above, when he is filled (sattva-samāviṣṭaḥ), i.e., thoroughly pervaded without fail, by the abundance of Sattva in his mind—which is the cause of discrimination between the Self and the not-Self—due to the absence of the impurities of Rajas and Tamas which obstruct right knowledge, meaning when his mind becomes refined by the purification characterized by the removal of the impurity of sin through daily actions dedicated to the Lord and the acquisition of the merit of fitness for the rise of knowledge, then he becomes wise (medhāvī), i.e., a man of steady wisdom (sthitaprajna), eternally endowed with "medhā"—which is the knowledge of the identity of Brahman and the Self in the form "I am Brahman", produced by the inquiry into the Upanishadic sentences called "hearing" (śravaṇa) associated with proximate aids like control of the mind, control of the senses, cessation of all actions, approaching the Guru, etc., and auxiliary aids like reflection (manana) and meditation (nididhyāsana), which knowledge is free from all doubts of invalidity and has nothing else but Consciousness as its object; then he is freed from doubts (chinnasaṃśayaḥ), i.e., free from doubts and errors which are the effects of ignorance, when that ignorance is destroyed by the wisdom which is the knowledge "I am Brahman"; then, because his actions have been exhausted, he does not hate inauspicious action (akusala), namely disagreeable, desire-oriented, or prohibited actions, and does not think of them as unfavorable; and he does not cling to auspicious action (kushala), namely agreeable daily duty, i.e., he does not rejoice in it, because he has accomplished all his tasks by being free from the conceit of agency, etc. And so says the Shruti: "The knot of the heart is untied, all doubts are sundered, and his actions are exhausted, when He who is high and low is seen" (Mundaka Upanishad 2.2.8). Since such is the fruit of Sattvik abandonment, therefore, it alone should be accepted even with great effort.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He states the characteristics of one who is established in such Sattvik abandonment in: "na dveṣṭi...". Filled with Sattva (sattva-samāviṣṭaḥ), i.e., thoroughly pervaded by Sattva, the Sattvik abandoner does not hate inauspicious action, namely that which brings pain, such as bathing early in the morning in the winter season; nor does he cling to auspicious action, namely that which is pleasant, such as bathing at midday in the summer season, i.e., he does not rejoice in it. The reason for this is: he is wise (medhāvī), i.e., of steady intellect. The meaning is: he is one who contemplates, "When even great pain like defeat by others is endured and even the happiness of heaven is renounced, of what account is this temporary pleasure and pain?" Therefore, he is one whose doubts, i.e., erroneous knowledge characterized by the desire to attain bodily pleasure and avoid bodily pain, have been destroyed.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having thus described Sattvik abandonment, he states the purpose of the aforesaid Karma Yoga, which is that a competent person who performs actions by abandoning attachment and desire for fruits becomes purified in mind, realizes the actionless Self which is free from modifications like birth etc., renounces all actions mentally, and remains without doing or causing anything to do, attaining steadfastness in Knowledge: "na dveṣṭi...". That abandoner who is endowed with the aforesaid renunciation of attachment and fruit and performs daily obligatory duties, when he is filled with Sattva (sattva-samāviṣṭaḥ)—i.e., thoroughly pervaded by the purified mind containing discrimination between the Self and the not-Self, which is refined by daily duties and untainted by attachment and fruit—therefore, he is wise (medhāvī), i.e., endowed with "medhā" which is the intellect characterized by the knowledge of the identity of Brahman and the Self. Because he is wise, he is one whose doubts created by ignorance have been sundered (chinnasaṃśayaḥ) by the firm conviction that abiding in the nature of Brahman and the Self is the supreme means to the highest Good and nothing else, as the Shruti says: "The knot of the heart is untied, all doubts are sundered..." (Mundaka Upanishad 2.2.8). At that time, he does not hate inauspicious (akushala), namely disagreeable, desire-oriented, or prohibited actions, thinking "these are causes of transmigration". He does not cling to auspicious (kushala), namely agreeable daily duty, i.e., he does not rejoice in it thinking "this will accomplish my goal". He states the characteristics of one established in such Sattvik abandonment: filled with Sattva, he does not hate inauspicious action which brings pain, such as bathing early in the morning in winter, nor does he cling to auspicious action which brings pleasure, such as bathing at midday in summer. The reason is: he is wise, i.e., of steady intellect, realizing how insignificant these temporary pleasures and pains are compared to the happiness of heaven and the Self. Others explain: the word "tu" shows distinction from the Rajasic and Tamasic abandoners. He does not hate the inauspicious person who is ignorant of liberation and talks nonsense, nor does he cling to the person who is skilled in performing actions and is like himself. He is free from doubts and wise, being absorbed in the supreme bliss of the Self. Thus, having described secondary Sattvik abandonment, he describes primary Sattvik abandonment: he who is thoroughly pervaded by Sattva is the primary Sattvik abandoner, i.e., a sannyasi. He does not hate painful duties nor cling to pleasant ones.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
For one who is endowed with scriptural abandonment rooted in Sattva, etc., the well-known characteristic consisting of the absence of modifications is stated in the verse "na dveṣṭi...", just as described in "he sits like one indifferent..." (Gita 14.23). By this, the fact that the abandonment of the said characteristics is rooted in Sattva is also established. He (Sri Ramanuja) explains the words in a different order, such as "sattva-samāviṣṭaḥ" first, due to the propriety of cause and effect. The lexicographers say: "Medha is the intellect capable of retention" (Amarakosha 1.5.2). And the Shruti says: "May this right intellect and wisdom enter us..." (Taittiriya Aranyaka 10.42). Therefore, since he does not deviate from the meanings instructed by the teacher and does not mix them up, he (Sri Ramanuja) states the result: "endowed with right knowledge, i.e., with the knowledge of the reality as it is". Here, the statement of "undesirable fruits, etc." is based on the idea of stating the reasons for the love and hatred that are prohibited by the words "kushala" and "akushala", which are synonyms of auspicious and inauspicious. He explains the cause of the abandonment called "tyagi": "on account of his renouncing all...". The idea is: just as in another's action performed by another agent, there is absence of hatred, etc., due to the certainty of the absence of one's own connection or obstruction, so is the case here too. Indeed, since there is no occasion for joy or hatred in the state of non-performance, he says "when they are being performed". Objection: "It is proper to say 'he does not cling to auspicious action', because even if one performs desire-oriented actions, by merely being free from attachment to heaven, etc., the scriptures declare non-connection with their fruits; but 'he does not hate inauspicious action' is contradictory, because prohibited actions connect with their fruits even in the absence of attachment to fruits, otherwise it would lead to the absence of sin of omission anywhere. For indeed, hell and the like cannot be desired by anyone. Thus, since absence of hatred towards the causes of seen sin of omission is not proper, the remedy is stated by referring to actions performed inadvertently." Objection: "Why should there not be non-tainting by intentional sinful actions in the case of a specific qualified person?" To this he says: "But one who has not ceased...". Connecting the meaning of this verse as the cause of the context, he concludes the ultimate topic: "Therefore..."

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Objection: "But how does the performance of action by renouncing attachment and fruit attain the nature of abandonment and Sattvik quality?" Raising this doubt, He says: "na dveṣṭi...". He does not hate inauspicious action which inherently causes suffering and leads to pain afterwards, but because it is of the form of God's command, he performs it when it arises. And even though he experiences happiness from the actions performed, being filled with Sattva (sattva-samāviṣṭaḥ), i.e., endowed with patience of the nature of Sattva, he does not cling to auspicious action by knowing that nothing is superior to My command; he does not become attached to it. Such is the meaning. The reason is: he is wise (medhāvī), i.e., intelligent, and free from doubts (chinnasandehaḥ). One who is free from hatred and attachment towards actions through the knowledge that pleasure and pain occur solely by My will, is to be known as a "tyagi". Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Thus, having described primary Sattvik abandonment (in 18.9), He describes secondary Sattvik abandonment in: "na dveṣṭi...". The abandoner who is thoroughly pervaded (samāviṣṭaḥ) by Sattva is the primary Sattvik abandoner, meaning a sannyasi. He does not hate inauspicious action which brings pain, consisting of efforts like bathing three times a day, fourfold purification, wandering for alms, etc. Nor does he cling to auspicious action, such as receiving sweet food as alms, i.e., he does not show attachment or crow-like fondness. Or, he does not cling to one who is skilled in action, like a disciple skilled in service, nor does he hate one who is unskilled (akushala). By this, his freedom from likes and dislikes is shown. If it be asked why this is so, He says: "wise" (medhāvī). Because he is wise in reasoning and discrimination between the eternal and transient objects. Therefore, he is free from doubt (chinnasaṃśayaḥ), i.e., free from hesitation as to whether actions alone are the means to liberation or sannyasa alone. And thus, by "tyāgī" (abandoner), there is exclusion of the view of non-abandonment stated in "sacrifice, charity, and austerity are not to be abandoned" (18.5). By "medhāvī", there is exclusion of Tamasic abandonment stated in "abandonment of it from delusion" (18.7). By the first half of the verse declaring the absence of likes and dislikes, there is exclusion of Rajasic abandonment stated in "he who abandons out of fear of physical suffering" (18.8). By "chinnasaṃśayaḥ", there is exclusion of secondary Sattvik abandonment stated in "obligatory action performed because it ought to be done" (18.9). For that person does not know in reality the insignificance of actions and the great fortune of sannyasa. If he knew, he would not remain in actions even for a moment. For indeed, one who wishes to soothe his burning sensation, knowing that the great lake of the Ganga is nearby, would not rejoice even for a moment in a puddle heated by the summer sun. The cause of the severing of doubts is also: "filled with Sattva" (sattva-samāviṣṭaḥ). Because there is a great difference: he is thoroughly pervaded by Sattva as the agent, and not that he merely took refuge in Sattva. And thus, this primary sannyasa, which is the fruit of the Karma Yoga in the form of Sattvik abandonment described in the previous verse, is to be practiced by seekers of knowledge; it is famous in Shrutis like: "On whatever day he becomes detached, on that very day he should renounce (go forth)", and "Desiring this world (of the Self) alone, the wanderers go forth". But in the Bhashya, the objection was raised: "But abandonment of action is threefold... how is the abandonment of attachment and fruit spoken of here as the third...". Having resolved the threefold nature of abandonment by saying "that abandonment is regarded as Sattvik", this verse was explained as being for the purpose of explaining the gradual path of steadfastness for one who has a purified mind and is oriented towards Self-knowledge through the performance of daily duties accompanied by the abandonment of attachment and fruits. Having explained the verse in that way, he concluded that the purpose of the aforesaid Karma Yoga was stated by this verse. But others explain: "The abandonment of action qualified by desire for fruits is of three kinds: from the absence of the qualification, the absence of the qualified object, and the absence of both. The first is ordained here itself; the second is censured here itself in its two kinds, Tamasic and Rajasic. The third is of two kinds, fit to be performed by one not qualified for actions, i.e., a seeker of knowledge, and by an enlightened person. Of these, the latter was explained before in the characteristics of the Sthitaprajna, etc.; the former will be described in the verse 'He attains the supreme perfection of actionlessness...' (18.49)." There, in the Bhashya, after promising three kinds of abandonment and properly showing two, the third was also presented by some common factor. But here, by including two in one and explaining only two kinds, the third is inserted in another place, hence the difference is the inability to fulfill the promise in the context.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The intelligent renouncer situated in the mode of goodness, neither hateful of inauspicious work nor attached to auspicious work, has no doubts about work.

 A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not hate anyone or anything which troubles his body. He does work in the proper place and at the proper time without fearing the troublesome effects of his duty. Such a person situated in transcendence should be understood to be most intelligent and beyond all doubts in his activities.