Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
tvamakṣaraṃ paramaṃ veditavyaṃ tvamasya viśvasya paraṃ nidhānam .
tvamavyayaḥ śāśvatadharmagoptā sanātanastvaṃ puruṣo mato me

Word Meanings:
त्वम् - Thou
अक्षरम् - imperishable
परमम् - the Supreme Being
वेदितव्यम् - worthy to be known
त्वम् - Thou
अस्य - this
विश्वस्य - of universe
परम् - the great
निधानम् - treasurehouse
त्वम् - Thou
अव्ययः - imperishable
शाश्वतधर्मगोप्ता - Protector of the Eternal
सनातनः - ancient
त्वम् - Thou
पुरुषः - Purusha
मतः - thought
मे - of me.

Life Application:
Acknowledge God as the imperishable supreme truth to be known, the ultimate refuge, and eternal guardian of righteousness.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
You alone are the Supreme Imperishable (Brahman) worthy to be known; You alone are the supreme refuge (abode) of this universe! You alone are the protector of the eternal Dharma (righteousness) and You alone are the ancient Person (Purusha)—this is my opinion.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Thou art the Imperishable, the Supreme Being, worthy to be known. Thou art the great treasure-house of this universe; Thou art the imperishable protector of the eternal Dhrama; Thou art the Primal Person, I deem.

त्वम् Thou? अक्षरम् imperishable? परमम् the Supreme Being? वेदितव्यम् worthy to be known? त्वम् Thou? अस्य (of) this? विश्वस्य of universe? परम् the great? निधानम् treasurehouse? त्वम् Thou? अव्ययः imperishable? शाश्वतधर्मगोप्ता Protector of the Eternal Dharma? सनातनः ancient? त्वम् Thou? पुरुषः Purusha? मतः thought? मे of me.Commentary VisvasyaNidhaanam Treasurehouse of this universe? also means abode or refuge or the substratum of this universe. It is because of this that all the beings in the universe are preserved and protected. He is the inexhaustibel source to Whom the devotee turns at all times. Deluded indeed are they that ignore this divine treasurehouse and runa fter the shadow of the objects of the senses which do not contain even an iota of pleasure.Veditavyam To be known by the aspirants or seekrs of liberation? through Sravana (hearing of the scriptures)? Manana (reflection) and Nididhyasana (meditation).Avyayah means inexhaustible? unchanging? undying.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Imperishable art Thou, the Sole One worthy to be known, the priceless Treasure-house of the universe, the immortal Guardian of the Life Eternal, the Spirit Everlasting.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
All intelligent men try to arrive at some conclusion from their every experience, which is called their knowledge. Arjuna also was having such an experience, which in its entirety was incomprehensible to the intellect and inexpressible in words. But from what he saw, he tries to draw some conclusion. Comprehending this experience, he arrives at the conclusion that the power or consciousness behind this cosmic form is indeed the imperishable Supreme Truth. The source of all waves arising, existing and dissolving in the ocean is the ocean itself. It is the repository (Nidhanam) of those waves. 'Nidhanam' means that in which things are contained, i.e., their support or refuge. Similarly, Arjuna also arrives at this wise conclusion that the Cosmic Person (Virat Purusha) is the repository, i.e., the substratum (Adhishthana) of the entire universe. By the word 'universe' (Visva), one should not understand only this visible physical world. According to Vedanta, whatever object is seen, experienced or known comes under the definition of the word 'Visva'. According to this definition, the objects of the senses, as well as the instruments that perceive them—senses, mind, etc.—are all 'Visva', and the Purusha is its repository (Nidhanam). For the modifications or changes of mutable objects, an immutable substratum is necessary. This changing world always dances to the tune of space and time. But, in order to experience the continuity of events and gain complete knowledge of them, the existence of an eternal, changeless knower is absolutely essential. That knower does not get involved in those events in any way. Such an immutable conscious principle is the true Self, which can support such a vast cosmic form. Keeping these thoughts in mind, Arjuna declares that the conscious principle, which has transformed itself into this wondrous form, is the one and only imperishable, changeless Truth that pervades everywhere in this changing world. According to the view of the Hindus, the protector of Dharma is the Supreme Lord Himself, and not a mortal king or a priestly class. The Hindus are not followers of any such accidental messenger who had a fleeting historical existence and whose life's work was to serve the contemporary generation as much as possible. For the Hindus, the eternal, true Purusha is the goal, the Guru and the path as well. For the protection of Dharma, we do not need any worldly power like poisonous gas or atomic bombs. 'You alone are the eternal Person, such is my opinion.' According to an analogy in Vedanta, the physical body is considered like a royal city with nine gates. The control and protection of each gate is done by a presiding deity. The conscious principle dwelling in this city of nine gates is called 'Purusha'. In the context of this verse, the meaning is that the solution to the riddle of our life lies in the attainment of this eternal Purusha, and not in the objects of the external world. This Purusha is the substratum of the universe, who can sustain the cosmic form, which Arjuna is beholding with awe-struck eyes.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
You are the imperishable, the Supreme Being to be known;  You are the ultimate place of  rest for this  universe; You are changeless and the guardian of the pious act of the Satvatas;  You are the everlasting Soul,  I believe.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
You are the Imperishable, Supreme One to be realised. You are the Supreme Substratum of this universe. You are immutable, the guardian of the eternal law, I know You are the Supreme Person who is everlasting.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
You are the Immutable, the supreme One to be known; You are the most perfect repository of this Universe. You are the Imperishable, the Protector of the ever-existing religion; You are the eternal Person. This is my belief.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
An objection may be raised: when the subject under discussion is the cosmic form of the Lord (which is associated with the universe), how can there be unconditional/attributeless statements like 'You are the Imperishable' (tvam akṣaram), which seem contrary to the context? In response to this doubt, he says: 'ita eva' (due to this only). The power of Yoga is the excellence of lordship. 'akṣara' (non-decaying/imperishable) indicates the state of being free from the phenomenal world. It is to be known because it is the supreme goal of human life and the supreme reality. This is because in Upanishadic passages like 'He in whom the heaven, the earth... (are woven)', even the repository of the world, which is inferior to That, is heard to be known. Why is Brahman to be known? In response to this, he says: 'tvam asya' (You are of this...). He states another reason for the attributeless Brahman being the object of knowledge: 'kiñca' (furthermore). Because of Your imperishability, You alone are fit to be known, while everything else, being perishable, is to be abandoned. The eternality of Dharma, which consists of knowledge and action, is based on the authority of the Vedas, and since it is said 'I manifest myself for the establishment of Dharma', You are its protector (goptā).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
I believe that You alone are the Supreme Imperishable (Akshara Brahman) to be known, You alone are the supreme refuge of this entire universe, You alone are the protector of the eternal Dharma, and You alone are the imperishable, ancient Purusha (Supreme Person).

Commentary—'tvamakṣaraṃ paramaṃ veditavyaṃ'—You alone are that bliss-embodied Akshara Brahman, who is known as Nirguna-Nirakara (attributeless and formless), and who is worthy to be known through the Vedas, scriptures, Puranas, Smritis, the words of saints, and liberated sages who have realized the Truth. 'tvamasya viśvasya paraṃ nidhānam'—Whatever world comes within the purview of sight, hearing, and understanding, You alone are the supreme refuge and support of that world. When the great dissolution (Mahapralaya) takes place, the entire world along with its cause merges into You alone, and again at the beginning of the great creation (Mahasarga), it manifests from You alone. In this way, You are the supreme repository of this world. [With these words, Arjuna praises by describing the Saguna-Nirakara (with attributes but formless) aspect.] 'tvaṃ śāśvatadharmagoptā'—Whenever there is decline of righteousness (Dharma) and rise of unrighteousness (Adharma), You alone incarnate to destroy unrighteousness and protect the eternal Dharma. [With these words, Arjuna praises by describing the Saguna-Sakara (with attributes and form) aspect.] 'avyayaḥ sanātanastvaṃ puruṣo mato me'—'Avyaya' means imperishable, eternal, without beginning; I believe that You alone are the Supreme Person who exists forever.

Relationship—After describing the astonishing divine form from the fifteenth to the eighteenth verses, now in the next two verses Arjuna describes the intensity, power, and capability of that Cosmic Form.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
You alone are the Supreme 'Imperishable Person' indicated as that which ought to be realised in such Upanisadic passages as:  'Two sciences are to be known' (Mun. U., 1.1.4). You alone are the 'Supreme Substratum' of the universe, i.e., supreme support of this universe. You are 'immutable', namely, not liable to mutation. Whatever might be your attributes and divine manifestations, You remain unchanged in Your form. You alone are the guardian of 'the eternal law' - You who protect the eternal Dharma of the Veda by incarnations like this. I know you are the everlasting Person. I know You are the eternal Person, described in such passages as, 'I know this great Purusa' (Tai. A., 3.12.7) and 'Person who is higher than the high' (Mun. U., 3.2.8). You, who were till now known to me as the most distinguished of the race of Yadu, have been realised by me now through direct perception as of this nature, i.e., of a nature unknown to me before. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Tvam aksaram etc.  Guardian of the pious acts of the Satvatas.  Satvatas are the same as the Satvatas i.e.  those who are established in the Truth that does not take cognizance of any difference between the Action  (11.Spanda)  and the Consciousness;  the Truth which is  nothing but Existentiality and is in the form of Awarenes.  Their  pious act is that  act  [of meditation] of theirs which - on account of its being  continously engaged in the process of undertaking and rejecting  [things] - consists of the act of emanation and absorption,  and is the most superior of  all the paths  [leading to salvation].  The Lord protects that pious act.  This is the secret in this chapter and it has been made almost clear by me  (11.Ag.) in my  (11.Ag.'s)  Vivrti (11.Commentary)  on the Devistotra  (11.Goddess-Hymn).  That is self-evident to the learned readers, with critical accuman, and initiation.  Hence, why to take recourse to the verbiage of explaining again and again what is already known very clearly.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tvam, You; are the aksaram, Immutable; the paramam, supreme One, Brahman; veditavyam, to be known-by those aspiring for Liberation. You are the param, most perfect; nidhanam, repository-where things are deposited, i.e. the ultimate resort; asya visvasya, of this Universe, of the entire creation. Further. You are the avyayah, Imperishable-there is no decay in You; the sasvata-dharma-gopta, Protector (gopta) of the ever-existing (sasvata) religion (dharma). You are the sanatanah, eternal; transcendental purusah, Person. This is me, my; matah, belief-what is meant by me.
Moreover,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Since it is so, therefore — 'tvam akṣaram' (You are the Imperishable) etc. This should be explained as an adjective of Brahman, which is to be known by the wise, as declared in 'Tat Tvam Asi' (That Thou Art). He is the 'eternal Purusha', the unmanifest cause even of the cosmic totality (samashthi), designated in the masculine gender. It is not the feminine unmanifest Prakriti that can be defined in this manner everywhere, because the unmanifest Imperishable (Akshara) is referred to here as Purusha.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Thus, seeing Your inconceivable and unsurpassable lordship (glory), I infer — 'tvam' (You). You alone are the Imperishable, the Supreme Brahman, who is to be known by seekers of liberation through the hearing of Vedanta, etc. You alone are the supreme repository (nidhanam) of this universe, in which everything is deposited, i.e., the ultimate refuge. Therefore, You are 'avyayah' (eternal), the protector and maintainer of this Dharma which is eternally established by the Vedas. Or, 'sasvata' (O Eternal One!) is a vocative. In that case, You are 'avyayah' (imperishable). Therefore, I believe that You alone are the ancient, eternal Purusha, who is the Paramatman (Supreme Self).

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Since Your lordship (power) is thus inconceivable, therefore — 'tvam' (You). You alone are the Imperishable, the Supreme Brahman. Of what nature? Worthy to be known by seekers of liberation. You alone are the supreme repository (nidhanam) of this universe—'nidhanam' meaning the ultimate refuge in which everything is deposited. Therefore, You are 'avyayah' (eternal/changeless), the protector (maintainer) of the eternal Dharma. I believe You are the ancient, eternal Purusha.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having seen, I infer. You alone are the Imperishable (aksaram, that which does not decay), the Supreme Brahman, to be known by seekers of liberation through hearing, etc. Because You alone are the supreme repository (nidhanam) of this universe, meaning the ultimate refuge in which everything is deposited. Moreover, You are 'avyayah' (free from destruction). Furthermore, You are the protector (guardian) of the eternal Dharma revealed by the eternal Vedas. Therefore, I believe You are the ancient Purusha.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
'tvam akṣaram' etc. By seeing the glory of the Lord through statements like 'tvam akṣaram' (You are the Imperishable), one is reminded of Upanishads like the Mundaka Upanishad through words such as Akshara, Veditavya, Avyaya, Sanatana Purusha. With this intention, it is said 'in the Upanishads...'. 'indicated' refers to passages like 'Then the higher science by which the Imperishable is realized' (Mund. Up. 1.1.5). Reflecting on the statement 'The abode named Vishnu is the support of all', he says 'the supreme support of this universe'. 'nidhanam' is that in which everything is deposited; since He is the repository of even other repositories, He is 'param nidhanam' (the supreme repository). The word 'param' is used to differentiate Him from the individual soul (jiva) which was earlier referred to as 'the support of the universe'. It is heard in the scriptures: 'The elements of existence are fixed in the elements of intelligence, and the elements of intelligence are fixed in the vital breath' (Kaush. Up. 3.9). The word 'param' explains that He has no other support. By the word 'avyaya', one is reminded of passages like 'that which is imperishable' (Mund. Up. 1.1.6) and 'the endless, imperishable seer' (Mahanar. 9.6). 'Vyaya' is any decay or deviation in His essential nature, attributes, or glory. The unqualified word 'avyaya' indicates that He has no such decay. If it only meant the eternality of the soul, which is common to individual jivas, there would be no excellence. With this intention, it is said 'whose form, attributes, and glory'. Here, the word 'vibhava' refers to the eternal manifestation (nitya-vibhuti). 'sasvata' means that which exists eternally. The reason for its eternity is its foundation in the eternal scriptures, hence 'Vedic' is used. In passages like 'Narayana is the guardian of the eternal Dharma', it is the specific Vedic Dharma that is referred to. By stating 'through such incarnations', it is meant that this truth is understood through direct perception and the scriptures. The two Upanishadic texts regarding 'Purusha' show that He is the object of worship and the goal to be attained. The word 'adi' includes passages like 'by which one knows the true, imperishable Purusha' (Mund. Up. 1.2.13). The word 'sanatana' strengthens the word 'satya'. To dispel the notion that 'matah' (deemed) means mere personal opinion, he says 'known'. In this verse, 'tvam' (You) refers to the form earlier perceived by the physical eyes, while the rest describes the form realized through the acquisition of divine eyes. Since the knowledge of His glory was already established, he says 'the ornament of Yadu race'. The word 'matah', which is general, culminates in the specific realization of direct perception expressed by 'I see', and hence it is said 'now directly perceived'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
By beholding such a form, he expresses his own realization — 'tvam' (You). You alone are the Imperishable, the Supreme Brahman in the form of Akshara. You are 'veditavyam' — You alone are the object of knowledge for devotees and wise men. By Your nature as Akshara, Your state as the cause of all creation is established. He describes the state of dissolution — You are 'param' (supreme), the form of liberation, the repository (nidhanam) of this universe, meaning the place of dissolution where everything is deposited. He describes Your role as protector — You are the protector and guardian of the eternal, constant Dharma. Even so, You are not composed of material attributes (gunas), but are 'avyayah' (imperishable and eternal). Having thus stated all attributes, he declares his main conviction — You are the eternal Purusha, Purushottama, which is accepted by me (me matah).

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Thus, saying 'by seeing Your power of Yoga, I know You as such', he explains Your immeasurability — 'tvam' (You). The supreme Imperishable (paramam aksaram) is that which is characterized by being not gross, etc. You alone are that partless Brahman (niskala brahma) previously described in 'aksaram brahma paramam' (8.3). By this, it is stated that the form with attributes (saguna) serves as the indicator of the attributeless (nirguna) reality, just as the tip of a tree branch indicates the moon. For this very reason, it is 'veditavyam' — fit to be known through the authority of Vedanta, and not merely to be worshipped. He states that You alone are also the saguna Brahman: 'tvam asya' (You are of this...). 'nidhanam' means the place of dissolution. By this, Your status as the cause is established. You are 'avyayah' (immortal) due to Your divinity. By 'protector of the eternal (Vedic) Dharma', Your form as Hiranyagarbha, who is the effect-Brahman (karya-brahma), is described. The ancient, beginningless Purusha, who is the individual soul (jivatman), is also You alone — such is my belief. Thus, in the vision of the cosmic form, the identity of the jiva and Brahman is realized, just as the moon is indicated by the branch of a tree.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
You are the supreme primal objective. You are the ultimate resting place of all this universe. You are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest. You are the maintainer of the eternal religion, the Personality of Godhead. This is my opinion.

There is no purport for this verse