Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
paśyaitāṃ pāṇḍuputrāṇāmācārya mahatīṃ camūm .
vyūḍhāṃ drupadaputreṇa tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

Word Meanings:
पश्य - behold
एताम् - this
पाण्डुपुत्राणाम् - of the sons of Pandu
आचार्य - O teacher
महतीम् - great
चमूम् - army
व्यूढाम् - arrayed
द्रुपदपुत्रेण - by Drupada's son
तव - your
शिष्येण - disciple
धीमता - talented

Life Application:
Acknowledge the capabilities of your opponents or rivals with clarity instead of letting insecurity distort your assessment.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O teacher! Behold this mighty army of the sons of Pandu, arrayed in battle formation by your intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada (Dhrishtadyumna).

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
"Behold, O Teacher! this mighty army of the sons of Pandu,
arrayed by the son of Drupada, thy wise disciple.

पश्य behold? एताम् this? पाण्डुपुत्राणाम् of the sons of Pandu? आचार्य O Teacher? महतीम् great? चमूम् army? व्यूढाम् arrayed? द्रुपदपुत्रेण son of Drupada? तव शिष्येण by your disciple? धीमता wise.No Commentary.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Revered Father! Behold this mighty host of the Pandavas, paraded by the son of King Drupada, thy wise disciple.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
In truth, it is a folly on Duryodhana's part to describe to Dronacharya in detail the military formation of the Pandavas. Further on we shall see that he speaks more than necessary, which is a clear sign of his doubt regarding the outcome of the war.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
O teacher !  Behold this mighty army of  the sons of  Pandu,  marshalled in  a military array by Drupada's son,  your intelligent pupil.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Behold, O teacher, this mighty army of the Pandavas, arrayed by the son of Drupada, your intelligent disciple.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O teacher, (please) see this vast army of the sons of Pandu, arrayed for battle by the son of Drupada, your intelligent disciple.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He cites that very statement with 'pashya' (behold). 'Behold this army stationed close to us, standing without a trace of fear, disregarding even great men like yourself -- this mighty army of the sons of Pandu (Yudhishthira and the rest), consisting of many akshauhinis, unassailable' -- thus Duryodhana enjoins the teacher; and through the injunction, making the others' contempt known to him, he strives to arouse an excess of anger. By describing the excellence of the enemy's army, hinting that 'even on the opposing side the strength is really yours' (trained by you), and considering that its dispersal is easy for the teacher, he says 'vyudham' (arrayed). 'Dhrishtadyumna, the son of King Drupada, your disciple, famed in the world, himself accomplished in the science of weapons and of great glory -- by him this army has been arrayed in formation and established; why do you not take note of it, or why do you tolerate it?' -- that is the meaning.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O teacher! Behold this vast, mighty army of the Pandavas, arrayed in battle formation by your intelligent disciple, Drupada's son Dhrishtadyumna.

Commentary -- 'acharya' (teacher): In addressing Drona as 'teacher,' Duryodhana's intent appears to be this: 'You are the teacher of us all -- of both the Kauravas and the Pandavas. Since you are the one who taught the science of arms, you are the guru of all. Therefore there should be no partiality or bias for anyone in your mind.'

'tava shishyena dhimata' (by your intelligent disciple): In using these words, Duryodhana's intent is: 'You are so guileless that you taught the science of weapons even to Dhrishtadyumna, who was born to kill you; and that disciple of yours, Dhrishtadyumna, is so intelligent that he learned the science of weapons from you yourself in order to kill you.'

'drupadaputrena' (by the son of Drupada): The purport of this word is that it was precisely with the aim of killing you that Drupada had a sacrifice performed by the brahmanas named Yaja and Upayaja, from which Dhrishtadyumna was born. That same son of Drupada, Dhrishtadyumna, stands before you (on the opposing side) as commander. Although Duryodhana could here have said 'Dhrishtadyumna' in place of 'son of Drupada,' yet, to remind Drona of the enmity that Drupada bore toward him, Duryodhana uses the word 'drupadaputrena' here -- [suggesting] that now is a good opportunity to settle that enmity.

'panduputranam etam vyudham mahatim chamum pashya' (behold this vast, arrayed army of the sons of Pandu): The meaning is that the very Pandavas for whom you have affection have, on your opposing side, made the very man who is to kill you -- Drupada's son -- their commander and given him authority to marshal the army. Had the Pandavas affection for you, they would at least not have made your slayer the chief commander of their army, nor given him such authority. Yet, knowing all this, they made him the commander.

Although, compared with the Kauravas, the Pandava army was smaller in number -- that is, the Kaurava army was eleven akshauhinis and the Pandava army seven akshauhinis -- still Duryodhana speaks of the Pandava army as vast and mighty. In calling the Pandava army vast and mighty, two intentions appear --
(1) The Pandava army was arrayed in such a manner that even a small army appeared very large to Duryodhana; and (2) in the Pandava army all the warriors were of one mind. Because of this unity, even the small Pandava army appeared great in strength and enthusiasm. By pointing out such an army, Duryodhana wishes to tell Dronacharya: 'When you fight, do not regard this army as ordinary and small. Fight with special effort and vigilance.' The commander of the Pandavas is, after all, your own disciple, the son of Drupada; so what great matter is it for you to conquer him! The purport of saying 'etam pashya' (behold this) is that this Pandava army stands ready before us for battle. Therefore you should decide, as quickly as possible, how we may conquer this army.
Connection -- Having entreated Dronacharya to behold the Pandava army, Duryodhana now shows him the great warriors of the Pandava army.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Dhrtarastra said - Sanjaya said  Duryodhana, after viewing the forces of Pandavas protected by Bhima, and his own forces protected by Bhisma conveyed his views thus to Drona, his teacher, about the adeacy of Bhima's forces for conering the Kaurava forces and the inadeacy of his own forces for victory against the Pandava forces. He was grief-stricken within.

Observing his (Duryodhana's) despondecny, Bhisma, in order to cheer him, roared like a lion, and then blowing his conch, made his side sound their conchs and kettle-drums, which made an uproar as a sign of victory. Then, having heard that great tumult, Arjuna and Sri Krsna the Lord of all lords, who was acting as the charioteer of Arjuna, sitting in their great chariot which was powerful enough to coner the three worlds; blew their divine conchs Srimad Pancajanya and Devadatta. Then, both Yudhisthira and Bhima blew their respective conchs separately. That tumult rent asunder the hearts of your sons, led by Duryodhana. The sons of Dhrtarastra then thought, 'Our cause is almost lost now itself.' So said Sanjaya to Dhrtarastra who was longing for their victory.

Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra:  Then, seeing the Kauravas, who were ready for battle, Arjuna, who had Hanuman, noted for his exploit of burning Lanka, as the emblem on his flag on his chariot, directed his charioteer Sri Krsna, the Supreme Lord-who is overcome by parental love for those who take shelter in Him who is the treasure-house of knowledge, power, lordship, energy, potency and splendour, whose sportive delight brings about the origin, sustentation and dissolution of the entire cosmos at His will, who is the Lord of the senses, who controls in all ways the senses inner and outer of all, superior and inferior - by saying, 'Station my chariot in an appropriate place in order that I may see exactly my enemies who are eager for battle.'

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Why this exhaustive counting? The reality of things is this:

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this sloka. The commentary starts from 2.10.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this verse. His commentary begins from 2.11.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Duryodhana too, beholding the army of the Pandavas guarded by Vrikodara (Bhima) and others, and his own army guarded by Bhishma and others, and perceiving the adequacy of that (Pandava) force for his own defeat and the inadequacy of his own force for defeating it, after reporting to his teacher, became dejected within himself.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He cites that very statement, a specific sentence, with 'pashyaitam' etc. Because of the earlier phrase 'tasya sanjanayan harsham' (Bhishma, generating his joy), and supposing that the teacher, being exceedingly tender-hearted toward the Pandavas, his dear pupils, would not fight, and making the others' contempt known to him, Duryodhana speaks in order to produce in him an excess of anger. 'Behold -- make directly perceptible -- this mighty army of the sons of Pandu, standing so very close, fearless, disregarding even great souls like yourself, and hard to withstand because it comprises many akshauhinis.' Here the imperative 'pashya' is in the sense of a request. 'I, being a disciple, request you, the teacher' -- thus he says 'acharya' (O teacher). The sense is: 'Having seen the contempt shown by them, you yourself will come to know it.' Objecting, 'But their contempt must indeed be borne by us, since countering it is impossible' -- to reply 'its repulsion is easy for you,' he says 'vyudham tava shishyena.' The superiority of the guru over the disciple is universally established. Saying 'arrayed by Drupada's son' instead of 'by Dhrishtadyumna' is meant, by hinting at Drupada's former enmity, to inflame anger. The word 'dhimata' (intelligent) is meant to indicate that he is not to be disregarded. 'Pashya' (behold) is a request, meant -- by ruling out other preoccupations -- to convey great urgency. Moreover: 'O teacher of the sons of Pandu, not mine -- because of your excessive affection for them. By the words drupadaputrena tava shishyena: though he was born to kill you, he was taught by you -- so your own folly is the very cause of my ruin,' he hints. That the weapon-lore which is the means of your killing was received from you, an enemy -- that is his 'intelligence.' Therefore the joy at seeing that army will be yours alone, owing to your delusion, and no one else's. 'This is to be shown to the very one to whom it should be shown -- so you yourself behold it' -- thus, displaying that army to the teacher, he reveals a hidden hatred. And so, for one who, even on reaching the field of dharma and even being the teacher, has such a corrupt outlook, what apprehension of remorse can there be? -- because, being suspicious of all, his disposition is exceedingly wicked. That is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He utters that very speech in the nine verses beginning with 'pashyaitam.' O teacher, behold the vast host, the army of the Pandavas -- arrayed by Drupada's son Dhrishtadyumna, established through the battle formation.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He cites that very statement with 'pashya' etc. 'Behold this mighty army of the sons of Pandu -- Yudhishthira and the rest -- standing face to face, disregarding even great chariot-warriors like yourself, comprising many akshauhinis, unshakable, arrayed and established through the battle formation by the intelligent Dhrishtadyumna, son of Drupada, your disciple.' O teacher -- though you are the teacher of both sides, your affection for the Pandavas is not fitting, since, disregarding you, they have stationed this mighty army right before you -- such is the intent. By the two words drupadaputrena tava shishyena, it is indicated that even your own death (Dhrishtadyumna, born to kill you) was trained by you, so you have no fear even of death. By this, the doubt 'how am I to fight alongside my own death?' is also removed. To dispel the doubt 'even what is taught is forgotten by a fool,' the word 'dhimata' (intelligent) is used. Hinting that 'even on the opposing side the strength is really yours,' and thinking that its repulsion is very easy for the teacher, he speaks 'vyudham' etc. -- so say some. Saying 'drupadaputrena' is to inflame anger by hinting at Drupada's former enmity. 'Dhimata' is to indicate that he is not to be disregarded. 'Pashya' is, by ruling out other preoccupations, to convey great urgency. Moreover, the king spoke a pointed utterance: 'O teacher of the sons of Pandu, not mine -- because of your greater affection for them. By drupadaputrena tava shishyena: though born to kill you, he was taught by you -- so your own folly is the cause of my ruin,' he hints. That the lore which is the means of his killing was received even from an enemy -- that is his 'intelligence'; therefore the joy at seeing that army will be yours alone, owing to your delusion, and no one else's. 'You yourself behold this, it being what is to be shown to the one to whom it should be shown' -- thus, toward the teacher, he reveals a hidden hatred. And so, for one who has such a wicked outlook even on the field of dharma, what apprehension of remorse is there? -- such is the intent, say some. Beginning with 'moreover,' the learned -- free from envy and partiality -- should consider whether this description of Duryodhana's intent, addressed to his own instructor and protector, whom he had approached with prostration and the like while making a request for battle, is inconsistent with the context or not. That the apprehension of remorse is contrary to the basis has already been stated. Now, if one says 'the teacher, having understood the deception practised by him, gave no reply' -- no; because the teacher's silence is established, in the manner to be stated hereafter, without imagining any meaning contrary to the context, and so imagining such a meaning is improper.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Thus, intending to give directly the answer 'yatra yogeśvaraḥ' (18.78) to the question that was asked out of a desire to know Suyodhana's (Duryodhana's) victory, Sanjaya — in order to make that answer credible — narrated all the intervening events as well: 'dṛṣṭvā.' 'Having seen the arrayed army of the Pandavas' is the cause of Suyodhana's loss of courage. The particular state consisting in that loss of courage, dependent upon it, is indicated by the word 'tu.' The unexpressed portion from 'dṛṣṭvā' up to 'anunādayan' is made explicit by the passage from 'duryodhana' up to 'akathayat' (Ramanuja-bhashya 1.19). 'saṃjñārtham' means 'for the sake of right knowledge,' or 'for the sake of enumeration by name or number.' There, the portion up to 'antarviṣaṇṇo'bhavat' — that is, ending with 'bhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi' (1.11) — has been explained. The meaning of the verse 'aparyāptam' (1.10) is this: 'tat' — therefore — 'our army guarded by Bhishma is aparyāptam (insufficient), not adequate to conquer the enemy's army; but this army of these Pandavas, guarded by Bhima, is paryāptam (sufficient), adequate to conquer our army.'
But this is untenable, since it would break the apprehended co-referentiality (sāmānādhikaraṇya) in 'tat balam,' and since earlier no cause was adduced for the capability or incapability of the enemy's army and one's own. Nor does he regard his own army, guarded by Bhishma, Drona and others, as incapable; for the slaying of the very powerful Bhishma, Drona and the rest is conditional. And in passages such as 'na bhetavyaṁ mahārāja' (Mahabharata, Udyoga 55.1), the capability of his own army is set forth by Duryodhana many times over. Nor is there now any ground for the contrary notion. Moreover, at the beginning of the second day Duryodhana will say: 'aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ balaṁ pārthābhirakṣitam, paryāptaṁ tv idam eteṣāṁ balaṁ pārthivasattamāḥ' (MBh, Udyoga). There the construction is simply 'asmākam aparyāptam,' not again 'asmākaṁ balam.' Therefore here too the same mode of expression is fitting. Hence the construal should be effected by a variant reading (pāṭhabheda), by remote construction (vyavahita-anvaya), by splitting the sentence (vākyabheda), or by a difference in word-meaning (padārthabheda).
Among these: the variant reading arises by transposing the words 'bhīma' and 'bhīṣma.' Thus, in the construction 'that army of ours, guarded by Bhima, is aparyāptam,' co-referentiality, the naturalness of the remote reference by 'tat,' and non-contradiction with Duryodhana's intent are all established. In remote construction too this same meaning holds; and here remote construction is possible in two ways — one by transposing 'bhīmābhirakṣita' and 'bhīṣmābhirakṣita,' the second by transposing 'aparyāptaṁ tat' and 'paryāptaṁ tv idam.' Merely the interval of separation is tolerated for the sake of appropriateness of meaning.
In splitting the sentence, the construal is thus: 'aparyāptaṁ tat' is one assertion, and 'paryāptaṁ tv idam' is a second. To the doubt 'what is the reason here?', the two sentences serve to supply the reason: 'our army is guarded by Bhishma,' 'their army is guarded by Bhima' — meaning, because our army is presided over by the strong and the enemy's by the weak.
In difference of word-meaning, the construal is thus: 'paryāptam' means 'paryāpana,' completion; 'paryāpta' is a kṛt formation in the agentive sense, meaning 'capable of destroying'; 'aparyāptam' means 'incapable of destroying.' 'This army of ours, guarded by Bhishma — tat — is aparyāptam, unable to destroy the enemy.' Here 'tat' designates the Pandava army as agent, and 'idam' designates one's own army as the agent that finishes off the enemy army. And because of the connection with the past-participle (niṣṭhā), the genitive in the objective sense is not obtained. Or else, 'aparyāptam' means 'unlimited (aparimita)' and 'paryāptam' means 'limited (parimita),' since one's own army is furnished with eleven akshauhinis and the enemy's with seven.
In any case, at the very outset of the war Duryodhana would surely not adduce the weakness of his own army and the strength of the enemy's — that would be like leaving the highway to enter a thief's hut. To explain: here, over against 'guarded by Bhishma,' with what intent is 'guarded by Bhima' pointed out? Not by way of Bhima's generalship like Bhishma's, since Dhrishtadyumna has been declared the commander of that (Pandava army). Nor by way of valour equal to Bhishma's, since Bhima is well known to be greatly unequal to him — as Bhishma himself said: 'Were not Vishnu, the primal Person, their protector, I am able with a single bow to slay all the Pandavas' (MBh). Nor by way of being lord of the opposing army, since the son of Dharma (Yudhishthira) is that. Nor by way of being the foremost warrior of the enemy army, since Arjuna alone is so renowned. Therefore, because Bhima is consecrated to the slaying of all the sons of Dhritarashtra and is endowed with the daring, strength, allies and the like suited to that end, he is specially mentioned. This being so, the mention of Bhishma as set over against him is likewise because Bhishma is understood to be devoted to protecting all the sons of Pandu. Hence it is said that by these two words (Bhima and Bhishma) the excessive apprehension of fear — regarding the enemy and regarding the ally — is indicated. As for what was stated earlier concerning the cause of the capability and incapability of the enemy's army and one's own...

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He states that very speech in the nine verses beginning with 'pashya.' There, since Bhishma had been consecrated (as commander), his enthusiasm was natural; observing Drona's indifference, Duryodhana encourages him by describing the enemy's superiority. 'etam' (this) means standing near. Since Yudhishthira has no kingship [here], they are spoken of without distinction as 'the sons of Pandu.' 'O teacher -- though you are equal toward both sides, still, because their army is strong, show partiality to us' -- hence the address. 'Behold this great army of the sons of Pandu, which generates fear in us, arrayed -- that is, swept into formation -- by the intelligent son of Drupada, Dhrishtadyumna, skilled in devising the formation.' By the epithet 'your disciple,' his (Dhrishtadyumna's) capacity to generate fear is indicated, as also the absence of fear in him.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The word 'drupadaputrena' ('by the son of Drupada') is an epithet employed to kindle anger by hinting at the former enmity (between Drona and Drupada).

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pāṇḍu, so expertly arranged by your intelligent disciple the son of Drupada.

 Duryodhana, a great diplomat, wanted to point out the defects of Droṇācārya, the great brāhmaṇa commander in chief. Droṇācārya had some political quarrel with King Drupada, the father of Draupadī, who was Arjuna’s wife. As a result of this quarrel, Drupada performed a great sacrifice, by which he received the benediction of having a son who would be able to kill Droṇācārya. Droṇācārya knew this perfectly well, and yet as a liberal brāhmaṇa he did not hesitate to impart all his military secrets when the son of Drupada, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, was entrusted to him for military education. Now, on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, Dhṛṣṭadyumna took the side of the Pāṇḍavas, and it was he who arranged for their military phalanx, after having learned the art from Droṇācārya. Duryodhana pointed out this mistake of Droṇācārya’s so that he might be alert and uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wanted to point out also that he should not be similarly lenient in battle against the Pāṇḍavas, who were also Droṇācārya’s affectionate students. Arjuna, especially, was his most affectionate and brilliant student. Duryodhana also warned that such leniency in the fight would lead to defeat.