Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yaḥ śāstravidhimutsṛjya vartate kāmakārataḥ .
na sa siddhimavāpnoti na sukhaṃ na parāṃ gatim

Word Meanings:
यः - who
शास्त्रविधिम् - ordinance of the scriptures
उत्सृज्य - having cast aside
वर्तते - acts
कामकारतः - under the impulse of desire
न - not
सः - he
सिद्धिम् - perfection
अवाप्नोति - attains
न - not
सुखम् - happiness
न - not
पराम् - Supreme
गतिम् - Goal.

Life Application:
He who discards scriptural guidelines and acts under impulse of desire attains neither perfection, happiness, nor supreme goal.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
He who, having cast aside the ordinances of the scriptures, acts under the impulse of desire, attains not perfection, nor happiness nor the Supreme Goal.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
He who, having cast aside the ordinances of the scriptures, acts under the impulse of desire, attains not perfection, nor happiness nor the Supreme Goal.

यः who? शास्त्रविधिम् the ordinance of the scriptures? उत्सृज्य having cast aside? वर्तते acts? कामकारतः under the impulse of desire? न not? सः he? सिद्धिम् perfection? अवाप्नोति attains? न not? सुखम् happiness? न not? पराम् Supreme? गतिम् Goal.Commentary He who does not care for the Self? who gives free rein to these three sins? is a traitor to the Self. He who has renounced the authority of the Vedas which? like a mother? is eally disposed and kind to all? and which? like a beaconlight? points out what is good and what is evil? does not attain perfection nor happiness nor the Supreme Goal. He who pays no attention to prescribed actions and follows the promptings of desire awakened by the senses? does not obtain God.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
But he who neglects the commands of the scriptures, and follows the promptings of passion, he does not attain perfection, happiness or the final goal.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
He who, having cast aside the ordinances of the scriptures, acts under the impulse of desire, attains not perfection, nor happiness nor the Supreme Goal.

Commentary: Swami Chinmayananda explains that the scriptures (Sastras) refer to texts like the Upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita that reveal the knowledge of the Self and the means to attain it. They are not merely rigid rituals. When a person ignores these spiritual guidelines and acts under the promptings of lust, greed, and anger, he destroys his own peace. Demoniac characters like Ravana acquired immense powers through penance but misused them due to desire, leading to their destruction. Acting whimsically under sensory desires prevents self-development and leaves a person in perpetual agitation, devoid of peace, happiness, and liberation.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
He, who neglects the injunction of the scriptures, and acts according to his own will-he attains neither the success, nor happiness nor the highest goal (emancipation).

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who, abandoning the injunctions of the Sastras, acts under the influence of desire, attains neither perfection nor pleasure, nor the supreme state.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Ignoring the precept of the scriptures, he who acts under the impulsion of passion,-he does not attain perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme Goal.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that for avoiding Asuri traits and practicing sreyas, the scriptures (which contain injunctions and prohibitions) are the only authority. Acting against them under the influence of desire ruins all human goals.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that some people may perform outwardly virtuous acts like charity or sacrifices, but if they do so ignoring scriptural rules and primarily to satisfy their own pride and desire, it is considered whimsical (kamakaratah). The purity of inner intention is what matters. If pride and desire remain hidden within, even great acts of renunciation eventually degrade into attachment. Such people do not attain inner purification (siddhi), nor do they experience the tranquil spiritual joy (sukha), and they miss the ultimate goal of liberation.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Here Sastra means Vedas. Vidhi stands for injunction. He who abandons My injunction called Vedas and acts under the influence of desire, viz., takes the path according to his own wishes, does not attain perfection, He does not reach any Siddhi in the next world, nor does he find the slighest happiness in this world, let alone the attainment of the supreme state. It is not possible for him to do so. Such is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 16.23–16.24 jointly): Yah sastravidhim  etc.  Tasmat etc.  On the other hand, a  fall into the hell is [inevitable] for a person who rejects the scriptural injunctions and makes, using his own intellect, an analysis as to what is to be done and what is not to be done.  Therefore, don't make a decision with your intellect about what is to be done and what is not to be done.-This is what is intended to be conveyed here.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Utsrjiya, ignoring, setting aside; sastra-vidhim, the precept of the scriptures, which is th source of the knoweldge of what is duty and what is not-called injunction and prohibition; yah, he who; vartate, acts; kama-karatah, under the impulsion of passion; sah, he; na, does not; avapnoti, attain; siddhim, perfection, fitness for Liberation; nor even sukham, happiness in this world; nor even the param, supreme best; gatim, Goal-heaven or Liberation.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya explains that abandoning the scriptural rules in favor of whimsical, non-scriptural faith prevents any attainment of truth, happiness, or the supreme destination.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that the Vedas and dependent Smritis are the source of knowing duty. One who abandons them out of lack of faith and acts whimsically cannot achieve inner purification (siddhi), happiness in this world, or liberation.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that abandoning Vedic duty in favor of sensory whims prevents one from achieving knowledge of truth (siddhi), peace (sukha), or liberation (mukti).

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that the Vedas and Smritis teach what is unknown. Abandoning them to act on personal desires prevents the purification of the mind and ruins the chance of achieving heaven or liberation.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that the Vedas are the commands of the Lord. Abandoning them for whimsical desires prevents the attainment of success in the next world and slighest happiness in this world, let alone liberation.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji explains that Asuras engage in unscriptural acts. If a devotee also disregards the scriptural commands to act whimsically, he will not achieve his desires, mental peace, or liberation.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'scriptural ordinance' refers to the injunctions like 'perform sacrifice' and prohibitions like 'do not drink intoxicants'. Violating them out of desire prevents mind purification and vacates all peace.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.

 As described before, the śāstra-vidhi, or the direction of the śāstra, is given to the different castes and orders of human society. Everyone is expected to follow these rules and regulations. If one does not follow them and acts whimsically according to his lust, greed and desire, then he never will be perfect in his life. In other words, a man may theoretically know all these things, but if he does not apply them in his own life, then he is to be known as the lowest of mankind. In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to be sane and to follow the regulations given for elevating his life to the highest platform, but if he does not follow them, then he degrades himself. But even if he follows the rules and regulations and moral principles and ultimately does not come to the stage of understanding the Supreme Lord, then all his knowledge becomes spoiled. And even if he accepts the existence of God, if he does not engage himself in the service of the Lord his attempts are spoiled. Therefore one should gradually raise himself to the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and devotional service; it is then and there that he can attain the highest perfectional stage, not otherwise. The word kāma-kārataḥ is very significant. A person who knowingly violates the rules acts in lust. He knows that this is forbidden, but still he acts. This is called acting whimsically. He knows that this should be done, but still he does not do it; therefore he is called whimsical. Such persons are destined to be condemned by the Supreme Lord. Such persons cannot have the perfection which is meant for the human life. The human life is especially meant for purifying one’s existence, and one who does not follow the rules and regulations cannot purify himself, nor can he attain the real stage of happiness.