Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
mahābhūtānyahaṃkāro buddhiravyaktameva ca .
indriyāṇi daśaikaṃ ca pañca cendriyagocarāḥ

Word Meanings:
महाभूतानि - the great elements
अहङ्कारः - egoism
बुद्धिः - intellect
अव्यक्तम् - the unmanifested
एव - even
च - and
इन्द्रियाणि - the senses
दश - ten
एकम् - one
च - and
पञ्च - five
च - and
इन्द्रियगोचराः - objects of the senses.

Life Application:
Observe the 24 elements: great elements, egoism, intellect, unmanifest, ten senses, mind, and five sense objects.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
The five great elements, egoism, intellect, the unmanifest (Prakriti), the ten senses, the one mind, and the five objects of the senses.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
The great elements, egoism, intellect, and also the Unmanifested Nature, the ten senses and one (mind), and the five objects of the senses.

महाभूतानि the great elements? अहङ्कारः egoism? बुद्धिः intellect? अव्यक्तम् the unmanifested (MulaPrakriti)? एव even? च and? इन्द्रियाणि the senses? दश ten? एकम् one? च and? पञ्च five? च and? इन्द्रियगोचराः objects of the senses.Commentary The field and its modifications are described in this verse. The twentyfour principles of the Sankhya school of philosophy are mentioned here.Great elements Earth? water? fire? air and ether are so called because they pervade all modifications of matter. The elements here referred to are the subtle? not the gross ones.Egoism is the cause of the great elements. It is the selfarrogating principle. Intellect is the cause of egoism. The function of the intellect is determination. Buddhi is the faculty of determination. The cause of the intellect is the Unmanifested (which is the undifferentiated energy of the Lord). (Cf.VII.14 Daivi hyesha gunamayi mama maya duratyaya  -- This divine illusion of Mine? caused by the alities? is difficult to cross over.) The above Nature is divided eightfold (Cf.VII.4).The ten senses are the five organs of knowledge (ears? skin? eyes? tongue and nose)? so called because they enable the mind to get knowledge of the external world? and the five organs of action (hands? feet? mouth? anus and the generative organ)? so called because they perform actions.The one This is the mind. This is the eleventh sense whose function is thinking and doubting (Sankalpa and Vikalpa).The five objects of the senses are sound? touch? form (colour)? taste and smell. These are the fivefol pastures of the senses.All the great elements? egoism? intellect? the senses and mind are all absorbed in the Unmanifested at the time of the cosmic dissolution.Mind is Maya. Mind is Avidya (ignorance). Mind is at the root of all activities. It gives strength to desires? fosters fear and builds castles in the air. It confers force on egoism and stimultates,aspirations. Every tendency has its origin in the mind. It augments passions? gives strength to hope and awakens the sense of duality. It increases ignorance and plunges the senses in the ocean of senseobjects. It creates distinctions and differences. It separates? divides and limits. It is a strong wall or an iron barrier that stands between the individual soul and the Absolute. It is this mind that has brought Brahman to the condition of the individual soul. It is the storehouse of error? cravings? doubt? delusion and ignorance. It is an everrevolving wheel that generates thoughts. It is a miraculous thoughtproducing machine. It creates at one moment. It destroys at the next moment.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
The five great fundamentals (earth, fire, air, water and ether), personality, intellect, the mysterious life force, the ten organs of perception and action, the mind and the five domains of sensation;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
See Commentary under 13.7

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The  [five]  great elements, the Egotism.  The Intellect, the Unmanifest, and also the ten organs and the one (organ and the) five objects of the sense-organs;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
The great elements, the Ahankara, the Buddhi, the Avyakta, the ten senses and the one, besides, the five objects of the senses;

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The great elements, egoism, intellect and the Unmanifest itself; the ten organs and the one, and the five objects of the senses;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The unmanifest, egoism, etc., are famous for having the nature of the three gunas, self-arrogance, and other attributes. If only the objects of the sense-organs like sound, etc., were taken, then since the objects of the organs of action were not mentioned, an incongruity would arise; and since the context here is the exposition of the field (Kshetra), 'what that field is and of what nature' was explained by indicating its essential nature. Now, in order to refute that desire, etc., are modifications of the Self, and to demonstrate that they are modifications of the field, showing 'what modifications it undergoes' and aiming to refute other philosophical views, Sri Shankara introduces the verse saying -- 'Atha' (Now), etc. Considering that the Vaisesika view must be rejected as it contradicts the statement of the All-knowing Lord, he uses the word -- 'Bhagavan'. He gives the reason for the desire to acquire an object of perception -- 'Sukha' (Happiness), etc. The word 'iti' is in the sense of cause, meaning there is desire for it because it is a cause of happiness. Having explained desire as being directed toward happiness and its causes, he refutes its being an attribute of the Self -- 'Sa iyam' (That very desire), etc. But how is it included in the field? To this he replies -- 'Jneyatvat' (Because of being an object of knowledge). Just as desire is an attribute of the intellect, so is hatred -- 'Tatha' (Similarly), etc. What is that hatred which is an attribute of the intellect? He says -- 'Yajjatuyam', etc. He shows its inclusion in the field just like desire -- 'Sah ayam', etc. Like desire and hatred, happiness is also an attribute of the intellect -- 'Tatha', etc. By stating its nature, he shows its inclusion within the field -- 'Anukulam' (Favorable), etc. Stating the nature of pain, he shows its presence within the field -- 'Duhkham' (Pain), etc. To refute the doctrines that identify the self with the body or senses, he analyzes the aggregate (samghata) included within the field -- 'Deha', etc. Against the Vijnanavada (Buddhist idealism), he says -- 'Tasyam', etc. Just as fire is manifested in a red-hot iron ball, the modification of intellect is manifested in the said aggregate. Just as the fire manifested there causes the iron ball itself to be perceived as fire, similarly the Consciousness of the Self manifested in the modification of the intellect causes that modification itself to be known as the Self; therefore, pervaded by that reflection of Consciousness, it is called 'chetana' (sentience). And since it is an object of knowledge to the primary Consciousness and is non-Self in nature, it is indeed the field. He demonstrates its nature as field through the definition of fortitude -- 'Dhritih', etc. If it is objected that there are other attributes of the mind such as volition (sankalpa), etc., why are they not explicitly mentioned here as the field? He answers -- 'Sarva', etc. He gives the reason why it serves as an illustration -- 'Yata', etc. Having established that volition, etc., are also implied on this occasion like desire, etc., for the division of the topic, he concludes the field described by the Lord; therefore it is proper that the mention of desire, etc., serves as an illustration for all unstated attributes of the intellect. He reiterates that the field has been explained for the dispassion (vairagya) of the detached person to qualify for knowledge -- 'Yasya', etc., meaning of all the individual body-divisions of the field. 'Samhati' means the aggregate or total body.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Unmanifested primordial Nature (Mula-Prakriti), cosmic intellect (Mahat-tattva), cosmic egoism, the five great elements, ten senses, one mind, and five sense objects of the five senses (—this is the field consisting of twenty-four principles).

Commentary: Avyaktam eva cha — 'Avyakta' is the name of primordial Nature (Mula-Prakriti). Primordial Nature is purely 'Prakriti' (cause) because it is the cause of cosmic intellect and is not the product (effect) of anything. Buddhih — This word denotes cosmic intellect, i.e., Mahat-tattva. Since egoism is produced from this intellect, it is Prakriti (cause), and being the product of Mula-Prakriti, it is Vikriti (effect). Thus, intellect is both cause and effect (Prakriti-Vikriti). Ahankarah — This denotes cosmic egoism, also called Ahambhava. As the cause of the five great elements, it is Prakriti, and as the product of intellect, it is Vikriti. Thus, egoism is Prakriti-Vikriti. Mahabhutani — Earth, water, fire, air, and ether are the five great elements. Great elements are of two kinds: Panchikrita (quintuplicated/gross) and Apanchikrita (unquintuplicated/subtle). The process of dividing each element into five parts and mixing them is called Panchikrita (Note p. 673). Before division, they are called Apanchikrita elements. Here, the word 'Mahabhutani' denotes these unquintuplicated elements, also called Pancha-tanmatras and subtle great elements. Since they cause the ten senses, one mind, and five sense objects like sound, these great elements are Prakriti, and as products of egoism, they are Vikriti. Thus, these five great elements are Prakriti-Vikriti. Indriyani dasha — Ears, skin, eyes, tongue, and nose are the five sense organs of knowledge (Jnanendriyas); speech, hands, feet, generative organ, and anus are the five motor organs of action (Karmendriyas). Being produced from unquintuplicated elements and not being the cause of anything else, all ten senses are purely Vikriti (effects). Ekam cha — Being born of unquintuplicated elements and not causing anything, the mind is purely Vikriti (effect). Pancha chendriyagocarah — Sound, touch, form, taste, and smell are the five sense objects of the five knowledge-senses. Being produced from unquintuplicated elements and not being the cause of anything, these five objects are purely Vikriti (effects).
The conclusion of all this is: five great elements, one egoism, and one intellect — these seven are both cause and effect (Prakriti-Vikriti); primordial Nature (Mula-Prakriti) is purely cause (Prakriti); and ten senses, one mind, and five sense objects — these sixteen are purely effects (Vikriti). Thus, the aggregate of these twenty-four elements is named the 'Field' (Kshetra). A small fraction of this is the human body, which the Lord referred to as 'idam shariram' in the first verse and 'tat kshetram' in the third verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
The 'great elements, the Ahankara, the Buddhi and the Avyakta' are substances that originate the Ksetra. The 'great elements' are the earth, water, fire, air and ether. The 'Ahankara' here means Bhutadi (primeval element). The 'Buddhi' is called Mahat; the 'Avyakta' is known as the Prakrti. The 'ten senses and the one' and the five objects of senses are principles depending on the Ksetra. The 'five sensorial organs' are ear, skin, eye, tongue and nose. The five motor organs are speech, hands, feet, and the organs of excretion and reproduction. These are the ten senses. The Manas is the additional 'one' moe. The 'objects of the senses' are five - sound, touch, form, taste and smell.

Desire, hatred, pleasure and pain, being the transformation of the Ksetra, are said to be the modifications of the Ksetra. Though desire, hatred, pleasure and pain are the alities of the self, yet they originate from the association of the self with the Ksetra. Sri Krsna will state that they are the attributes of the self; 'In the experience of pleasure and pain, the self is said to be the cause' (13.20).

The combination of elements serves as the support (Adhrti) of the intelligent self. As such, the word Adhrti means substratum. The combination of material elements has arisen as the substratum for the self to experience pleasure and pain, and for aciring worldly experiences and the final release. The combination of elements is formed by substances commencing from the Prakrti and ending with the earth; it is the basis of senses which are endowed with the modifications of the nature of desire, hatred, pleasure and pain. These form a Sanghata or an association of elements. It serves as the basis of the experience of pleasure and pain by the individual self. This is what is said of the Ksetra. This Ksetra has been explained briefly with its modifications and effects.

Now certain alities, the effects of the Ksetra, worthy of being acired as being the means for securing the knowledge of the self, are enumerated.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.6–13.7 jointly): Mahabhutani etc.  Iccha etc.  The Unmanifest :  the  [prime] material cause.  The organs :  together with the mind, they are  eleven in number.  The object of  the snese - organs : the colour etc.,  that are five in number.  Sensibility :  the perceiving energy i.e. the Individual Soul.  Feeling of satisfaction  (or self-?nd) :  It is well known that at the last moment, when a given action is  [just]  begun or accomplished and desire, anger etc.  (come up and accomplished)  there arises - in the case of everone from Brahma (personal god)  down to the worm-a feeling of satisfaction  (or self-?nd) as  'This much is ite sufficient for me;  what  is the use of another one ?  Let me always be in this manner',-a feeling which upholds one's  life, and is in the form of consolation and which is called by the expression  raga in the highly secret ?ndments.  (5-6)
 The Field has been explained as above; so also the Field-sensitizer.  Now  [what conduces to the true]  knowledge is mentioned as-

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Mahabhutani, the great elements: Those elements which are great owing to their pervasion of all midifications, and which are subtle. As for the gross elements, they will be spoken of by the word indriya-gocarah, objects of the senses.
Ahankarah, egoism, which is the source of the great elements and consists of the idea of 'I'. Buddhih, intellect, the source of egoism and consisting of the faculty of judgement; ca, and; its cause, the avyaktam eva, Unmanifest itself, the Undifferentiated, the power of God spoken of in, 'Maya of Mine৷৷.difficult to cross' (7.14). The word eva (itself) is used for singling out Prakrti (Nature). The Prakrti divided eightfold [The undifferentiated (avyakta), mahat, egoism and the five uncompunded subtle elements] is this much alone. The word ca (and) is used for joining the various categories.
The dasa, ten; indriyani, organs : The five, organs ear etc., which are called sense-organs since they produce perception, and the (other) five organs-organ of speech, hands, etc.-which are called motor-organs since they accomplish actions. They are ten. Ekam ca, and the one-which is that?-the mind, the eleventh, possessed of the power of thinking etc. (see fn. on p. 173). Ca, and; the panca, five; indriya-gacarah, objects of the senses-such objects as sound etc. The followers of the Sankhya call these which are such the twenty-four categories.
Thereafter, the Lord now says that even those alities which the Vaisesikas speak of as the attributes of the sould are certainly the attributes of the field, but not of the Knower of the field:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Mahabhuta...', etc. That field which is substance is gross, composed of the elements (mahabhuta), and of whatever nature it is — it serves as the substratum for egoism, intellect, the great principle (Mahat), the eleven sense-objects, and the subtle elements of the subtle body (linga-sharira).

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Having thus aroused interest in Arjuna, the Lord describes the nature of the field in two verses, beginning with 'Mahabhutani', etc. Great elements mean the five beginning with earth; egoism is its cause, characterized by self-arrogance; intellect is the cause of egoism, which is Mahat-tattva characterized by determination; the Unmanifest (Avyakta) is its cause, which is Pradhana consisting of the three gunas (sattva, rajas, tamas), the cause of all and effect of none. The word 'eva' is used to define Prakriti, meaning that the eightfold Prakriti is this much alone. The word 'ca' is for combining the various divisions. Thus it has been explained according to the Sankhya view. But according to the followers of the Upanishads, Avyakta is the unmanifested, indescribable Supreme Power called Maya, as expressed in 'mama maya duratyaya'. At the beginning of creation, the divine vision (ikshana) directed toward Truth is Buddhi (intellect); following the vision, the resolve 'May I become many' is Ahankara (egoism). Then from ether onwards in sequence arises the origin of the five elements. Indeed, the Avyakta, Mahat, and Ahankara as established by Sankhya are not accepted by the Upanishadic seers, as settled by arguments like being unscriptural, etc. Shruti texts like 'Know Maya to be Prakriti and Maheshvara to be the possessor of Maya' and 'Following the yoga of meditation, they saw the self-power of the Divine hidden by its own gunas' set forth this Avyakta. 'It willed' (Tadaikshata) is intellect in the form of vision. 'May I become many and reproduce' is egoism in the form of the resolve to become manifold. 'From that very Self, ether was born...' are the five elements declared in the Shruti. This view is indeed superior. The ten and one senses: ear, skin, eye, tongue, and nose are the five senses of knowledge; speech, hands, feet, anus, and generative organ are the five motor organs of action. And the one mind is of the nature of volition and doubt. The five sense objects are sound, touch, form, taste, and smell — these are the objects known by the senses of knowledge and objects of action for the motor organs. The Sankhyas enumerate these as the twenty-four categories.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
There, the Lord describes the nature of the field in two verses, beginning with 'Mahabhutani', etc. Great elements mean the five beginning with earth; egoism is their cause; intellect is Mahat-tattva of the nature of intelligence; Unmanifest is Mula-Prakriti (primordial nature); the ten external senses (ear, skin, nose, eye, tongue, speech, hands, generative organ, feet, and anus); the one mind; and the five sense objects — sound, touch, form, taste, and smell in the form of the five tanmatras, which manifested as specific qualities of ether, etc., become the five sense objects. Thus twenty-four categories are stated.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having thus drawn Arjuna's attention through the praise of the true nature of the field, etc., the Lord specifies the field as promised to Arjuna who is eager to know 'what it is', beginning with 'Mahabhutani', etc. Great elements are those which are subtle and great owing to their pervasion of all modifications; egoism in the form of 'I-consciousness' is the cause of the great elements; intellect characterized by determination is the cause of egoism; that which is unmanifested is Avyakta, the unmanifest divine power Maya — spoken of as 'Know Maya to be Prakriti' and 'My divine Maya is difficult to cross'. The word 'eva' is for emphasis, meaning the eightfold Prakriti is this much alone. The word 'ca' is for combining the tanmatras and other divisions along with Mula-Prakriti. The ten senses: ear, skin, eye, tongue, and nose are five knowledge-senses; speech, hands, feet, anus, and generative organ are five motor-senses; the one eleventh mind is of the nature of volition and doubt; the five sense objects are gross elements endowed with qualities like sound, touch, form, taste, and smell. The Sankhya philosophers explain these twenty-four categories as 'Mula-Prakriti, seven cause-effects (Mahat, etc.), and sixteen modifications'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
In the statement 'What that field is and of what nature' (13.4), the clause 'Mahabhutanyahankaro buddhiravyaktameva ca' demonstrates 'what it is' (Yacca). With this intention, the Seer comments from 'Mahabhutani' onwards as 'substances that originate the field'. Since the word 'bhuta' is also used for embodied conscious beings, to remove that misconception he states the relevant meaning — earth, water, fire, etc. Although the word 'ahankara' refers to threefold egoism, since sattvika ahankara originates the senses and rajasa supports both, he indicates that tamasa ahankara is meant here. To remove the misconception that 'buddhi' means determination (adhyavasaya), he clarifies — 'Buddhi is Mahat-tattva'. If 'avyakta' meant the unmanifest as stated in Subala Upanishad ('Avyakta dissolves into Akshara'), its cause would also have to be stated; hence he explains — 'Avyakta is Prakriti'. The passage 'Indriyani dashaikam ca', etc., demonstrates 'of what nature it is' (Yadrik ca) — with this intention he comments from 'Indriyani dasha' onwards as 'principles depending on the field'. To clarify the elevenness of the senses and the five sense-objects mentioned, in accordance with Parashara's statement in Vishnu Purana (1.2.48,49), he describes those senses and sense-objects in detail beginning with 'Srotram-tvak...', etc.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The Lord states the nature of that field in two verses, beginning with 'Mahabhutani', etc. Great elements are earth, etc. Egoism is their cause. Intellect is of the nature of intelligence. Unmanifest is Mula-Prakriti (primordial Nature). Senses are ten. And further, one mind. Sense objects are five beginning with sound in the form of tanmatras. Thus twenty-four principles are propounded.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
The Lord explains 'What that field is, of what nature it is, and what modifications it undergoes', beginning with 'Mahabhutani', etc. The word 'ca' has a different order and should be placed after 'buddhi' as 'buddhishca'. That field which was described as the body is indeed Avyakta itself. In the Shruti text 'Shariram rathameva tu', the word Avyakta refers to the five tanmatras. He states its varieties: it has sprouted in seven forms as the great elements, egoism, and intellect. By the word 'mahabhuta', the five tanmatras are meant. Egoism and intellect denote Mahat-tattva. In dream, these very instruments shine forth and the group of elements appears accordingly; hence the field is said to be of that many varieties. He answers 'what modifications it undergoes' starting with 'Indriyani', etc. 'Indriyani dashaikam ca' means eleven. Five knowledge-senses, five motor-senses, and the mind make eleven. The domains of the senses, i.e., objects (five gross elements) — this sixteenfold group is purely modification. The Sankhya philosophers count these as the twenty-four categories. Our specific distinction is only this: they describe Prakriti as independent and real, whereas we describe it as illusory, false, and dependent on God. And so says the Shruti: 'Know Maya to be Prakriti and Maheshvara to be the possessor of Maya'. Therefore, one should not be deluded into thinking that the Lord has adopted the Sankhya doctrine here.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the ten senses, the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred, happiness, distress, the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions—all these are considered, in summary, to be the field of activities and its interactions.

 From all the authoritative statements of the great sages, the Vedic hymns and the aphorisms of the Vedānta-sūtra, the components of this world can be understood as follows. First there are earth, water, fire, air and ether. These are the five great elements ( mahā-bhūta ). Then there are false ego, intelligence and the unmanifested stage of the three modes of nature. Then there are five senses for acquiring knowledge: the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin. Then five working senses: voice, legs, hands, anus and genitals. Then, above the senses, there is the mind, which is within and which can be called the sense within. Therefore, including the mind, there are eleven senses altogether. Then there are the five objects of the senses: smell, taste, form, touch and sound. Now the aggregate of these twenty-four elements is called the field of activity. If one makes an analytical study of these twenty-four subjects, then he can very well understand the field of activity. Then there are desire, hatred, happiness and distress, which are interactions, representations of the five great elements in the gross body. The living symptoms, represented by consciousness, and convictions are the manifestation of the subtle body – mind, ego and intelligence. These subtle elements are included within the field of activities. The five great elements are a gross representation of the false ego, which in turn represents the primal stage of false ego technically called the materialistic conception, or tāmasa-buddhi, intelligence in ignorance. This, further, represents the unmanifested stage of the three modes of material nature. The unmanifested modes of material nature are called pradhāna. One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along with their interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. In Bhagavad-gītā , a summary only is given. The body is the representation of all these factors, and there are changes of the body, which are six in number: the body is born, it grows, it stays, it produces by-products, then it begins to decay, and at the last stage it vanishes. Therefore the field is a nonpermanent material thing. However, the kṣetra-jña, the knower of the field, its proprietor, is different.