Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
asaktiranabhiṣvaṅgaḥ putradāragṛhādiṣu .
nityaṃ ca samacittatvamiṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu

Word Meanings:
असक्तिः - nonattachment
अनभिष्वङ्गः - nonidentification of the Self
पुत्रदारगृहादिषु - in son
नित्यम् - constant
च - and
समचित्तत्वम् - evenmindedness
इष्टानिष्टोपपत्तिषु - upon the attainment of desirable and undesirable results

Life Application:
Practice non-attachment and non-identification with family, home, and possessions, maintaining constant even-mindedness in desirable and undesirable events.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Non-attachment, non-identification (absence of intense attachment) with son, wife, home, etc., and constant even-mindedness on the attainment of the desirable and the undesirable.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Non-attachment, non-identification of the Self with son, wife, home and the rest, and constant even-mindedness on the attainment of the desirable and the undesirable.

असक्तिः nonattachment? अनभिष्वङ्गः nonidentification of the Self? पुत्रदारगृहादिषु in son? wife? home and the rest? नित्यम् constant? च and?समचित्तत्वम् evenmindedness? इष्टानिष्टोपपत्तिषु on the attainment of the desirable and the undesirable.Commentary When a man thinks? This object is mine? the idea of mineness enters his mind. He develops Abhimana (false identification). Then he begins to love the objects. He clings to them and gets attached to them. Asakti is nonattachment to objects. There is absence of liking for the objects.Anabhishvangah There is intense attachment to wife? son or mother? etc. There is complete identification of the Self with another. He feels happy or miserable when that person is happy or miserable. Govindan feels miserable when his wife is dead because he was very much attached to her but he does not feel anything when his neighbours wife is dead. A man of wisdom has no attachment to his home. He considers his home as a public inn on the side of a public road.And the rest Others who are very dear relatives or other dependants.Constant evenmindedness or eanimity is an index of knowledge. The man of wisdom is neither elated when he gets the desirable or pleasant objects? nor grieves when he attains the undesriable or painful objects.Nonattachment? absence of affection and eanimity are all conducive to the attainment of knowledge of the Self. They are designated as knowledge because they are the means of attaining knowledge.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Indifference, non-attachment to sex, progeny or home, equanimity in good fortune and in bad;

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Non-attachment: The general fondness towards acquired objects is called sakti or attachment. Its absence is non-attachment (asakti). The sorrow we experience is not caused by objects themselves, but by our mental attachment to them. Just as fire itself cannot burn anyone unless one touches it.
Non-identification (anabhisvangah) towards son, wife, home, etc.: Excessive affection is called abhisvanga; hence its absence is called anabhisvanga. When general affection for an object or person grows into deep attachment, it is called abhisvanga. The characteristic of this identification is that a person identifies so completely with his beloved object or person that their happiness and sorrow are felt as his own. A clear example of this is a mother's intense attachment to her son. Due to such attachment, agitations continuously arise in a person's mind and he becomes inefficient in action.
We must erect a wall of discrimination around our inner personality so that all these agitations remain away from us and the balance of mind is constantly maintained, without which no progress or prosperity is ever possible.
Equanimity of mind in pleasant and unpleasant circumstances can be acquired through constant practice. If a man frees himself from the bonds of foolish affection and attachment, he discovers a reservoir of extra energy within himself, which he must utilize in the right direction; otherwise, that very energy could prove to be self-destructive. What that right direction is, is explained in the next verse.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Non-attachment; detachment towards [one's] children, wives, houses and the like; and a constant eal-mindedness on the occurrence of the desirable and the undesirable things;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Non-attachment, absence of clinging to son, wife, home and the like, and constant even-mindedness to all desirable and undesirable events;

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Non-attachment and absence of fondness with regard to sons, wives, homes, etc., and constant eanimity of the mind with regard to the attainment of the desirable and the undesirable;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
'Sakti' means affection (general attachment). When that very affection becomes overly mature or intense, it is called 'Abhisvaṅga'. According to the lexicon: affection is sakti, and that very affection when highly intensified is designated as abhisvaṅga.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri Commentary: Stating another means, Sri Shankara says 'kincha' etc. He explains the brief concept of 'ananya-yoga' with 'na' etc. He shows the steadfastness of devotion in the Lord produced through the aforesaid intellect with 'na' etc. There too, the word 'knowledge' is used because it is the cause thereof, as stated by 'sa cha' etc. He gives two examples of the solitude of place with 'vivikta' etc. Clarifying the same, he says 'aranya' etc. How the resort to such a place is a cause for knowledge is explained with 'viviktesu' etc. By the word 'atma-adi', the Supreme Self and the purport of the Mahavakyas are implied. Question: Why is not the entire crowd of people taken in general as the object of distaste? To this he replies 'tasya' etc., meaning that even association with the virtuous is referred to as medicine.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Being free from attachment; absence of identification (deep connection) with son, wife, home, etc., and constant even-mindedness of the mind on the attainment of favorable and unfavorable situations.

Explanation — Asaktiḥ: The affection felt towards born (worldly) objects, individuals, events, circumstances, etc., is called sakti. Being free from that sakti is called asakti. Man develops attachment and affection for worldly objects and persons due to the desire to derive pleasure from them, the hope of pleasure, and the enjoyment of pleasure. This is because man sees no pleasure except through contact, hence pleasure born of contact seems dear to him. But real happiness comes from freedom from contact (Gita 6.23); therefore, it is extremely essential for a seeker to renounce worldly attachment.
Remedy — Pleasure born of contact appears like nectar in the beginning, but in the end it turns out to be like poison (Gita 18.38). One who enjoys contact-born pleasure inevitably has to suffer sorrow in the end — this is a rule. Thus, keeping one's view on the consequence of contact-born pleasure removes attachment to it.
Anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ putradāragṛhādiṣu: The close relationship, deep delusion, identification, assumed oneness felt towards son, wife, home, wealth, land, cattle, etc., which even affects one's physical body, is named abhisvaṅga. For instance, due to a mother's oneness with her son, when the son falls ill, the mother's body becomes weak. Similarly, when a son or wife dies, a man says 'I am dead', when wealth is lost, he says 'I am ruined', etc. To be free from such identification, the term anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ is used here.
Remedy — One should serve those with whom a deep relation is felt and bring them happiness, but should not have the objective of deriving happiness from them. The objective should be to eliminate identification (abhisvaṅga) with them. If the objective is to receive service from them, identification will occur. Yes, if one has to accept service from them for their satisfaction, one should not be pleased with it, because being pleased will lead to identification. The point is not to get attached to anyone. One should exercise great caution regarding this.
Nityaṁ ca samacittatvamiṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu: Upon obtaining desirable (favorable to the mind) objects, persons, situations, events, etc., there should be no modifications of passion, joy, or pleasure in the mind; and upon obtaining undesirable (unfavorable to the mind) objects or persons, there should be no modifications of malice, grief, sorrow, or agitation. The point is that during favorable and unfavorable situations, there should be continuous equanimity in the mind, and it should have no impact on the mind. The Lord has also stated this with the words 'siddhyasiddhyoḥ samo bhūtvā' (2.48).
Remedy — Whatever favorable resources a person has received, he considers them his own and enjoys pleasure — this is a great obstacle. Because worldly resources are given solely to be engaged in the service of the world, not to bring pleasure to one's own body and senses. Likewise, whatever unfavorable situations a person encounters are not given to cause suffering, but rather to help him renounce contact-born pleasure and free him from worldly passion, attachment, desire, and mineness. The point is that both favorable and unfavorable conditions are meant to raise man above happiness and sorrow (transcending both) and lead him to the Supreme Reality — by firmly believing this, a seeker's mind will automatically remain equipoised on attaining the desirable and the undesirable.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Non-attachment' means freedom from attachment to things other than the self. 'Absecne of clinging' to son, wife, home and the like means absence of excessive affection for these beyond the limits allowed by the Sastras. 'Constant even-mindedness' to all desirable and undesriable events means the state of freedom from joy and grief with regard to occurrences springing from desire.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.8–13.12 jointly): Amanitvam etc.  upto anyatha.  [Devotion] with me Yoga of non-difference etc. :  a conviction, 'There exists nothing else different from the Mighty Lord, the Supreme Soul,' - a conviction, which allows no difference and is itself a Yoga, i.e. a devotion in the form of this conviction.  Hence this never fails.  For, either the desires that are considered to be causes for failure are absent, or those desires which are of the form of mind-modifications,  are completely absorbed in Him alone.  The above may be borne in mind in all [other] cases too.  What is opposed to this is  [conducive to]  wrong  knowledge :  such as pride and others.
 That which is to be known by this knowledge is described  [as] -

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Asaktih, non-attachment-attachment means merely the kind for things arising from association; the absence of that is asaktih; and anabhisvangah, absence of fondness-abhisvangah, is in fact a special kind of attachment consisting of the idea of self-identification; as for instance, thinking 'I myself am happy,' or, 'I am sorrowful,' when somody else is happy or unhappy, and thinking 'I live', or, 'I shall die,' when some- body else lives or dies-With regard to what? In answer the Lord says: putra-dara-grhadisu, with regard to sons, wives, homes, etc. From the use of 'etc.' (it is understood that this fondness is) even with regard to others who are liked very much-retinue of sevants and so on. And since both these (absence of attachment and fondness) lead to Knowledge, therefore they are called Knowledge.
And nityam, constant; sama-cittatvam, eanimity of mind, mental eipoise;-with regard to what?-ista-anista-upapattisu, the attainment of the desirable and the undesirable; mental eipoise with regard to them, always, without exception. One does not become happy on the attainment of the desirable, nor does he become angry on the attainment of the undesirable. And that constant eanimity of mind which is of this kind is Knowledge
Further,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
He explains the difference in meaning between the words 'sakti' and 'abhisvanga' starting with 'saktih' etc.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Asakti' means dispassion (detachment) towards enjoyments in the hereafter.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Asakti' — Furthermore, sakti is mere fondness based on the thought 'this is mine'. Abhisvanga, however, is excessive fondness with the sense of identity 'this is I myself', thinking that when another is happy or sorrowful, 'I myself am happy or sorrowful'. The absence of these is called asakti and anabhisvanga. Where are sakti and abhisvanga to be avoided? To this he says: 'putra...' etc. In sons, wives, homes, etc. — that is, in sons, wives, homes, and by the word 'etc.', in servants and all other objects of affection. 'Nityam cha' means always. 'Samacittatvam' means a mind free from exultation and grief. 'Istanistopapattisu' — upapatti means attainment. It means absence of exultation on obtaining the desirable and absence of grief on obtaining the undesirable. The word 'cha' (and) is conjunctive.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Furthermore — 'Asakti' means renunciation of fondness for objects like sons etc. 'Anabhisvanga' means absence of excessive superimposition (identification) such as thinking 'I myself am happy or sorrowful' in the happiness or sorrow of sons etc. Maintaining constant, perpetual even-mindedness in the attainment of the desirable and the undesirable.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Furthermore — Asakti means the absence of mere fondness for objects caused by association. Anabhisvanga means the absence of that attachment characterized by self-identification with son etc., such as thinking 'I myself am happy or sorrowful, I live or die' when another like son etc. is happy, sorrowful, alive or dead. By the word 'etc.', other very dear ones like servants, animals, etc. are also included. Constant (always) even-mindedness on the attainment of the desirable and undesirable means avoiding exultation on attaining the desirable and anger on attaining the undesirable. Since all these three are intimate means to Knowledge, they are designated as Knowledge.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha Commentary: Previously under verse 13.9, dispassion toward contact-born objects of sound etc. was stated; now by 'asaktih', freedom from attachment to cherished objects born of false pride is stated, avoiding tautology by specifying detachment toward possessions other than the Self. Question: How then can a householder seeking liberation perform duties of his stage of life if all cherished duties are abandoned? To this it is said: 'anabhisvangah putradaragrahadisu'. Here, literal abandonment of objects utilized according to scriptures is not intended, for even for an ascetic, only attachment to inevitable items is prohibited ('He whose attachment is neither in wall, nor water, nor cloth, nor seat, nor house, is a knower of liberation'). Thus possessions are accepted solely for spiritual duty. Attachment leads to intense passion ('sangat sanjayate kamah' 2.62), hence absence of cause implies absence of effect. Since complete equanimity toward contact-born agreeable and disagreeable things is impossible, equanimity toward resolve-born things is taught.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Furthermore — 'Asakti' means absence of attachment to son, wife, home, and other objects. 'Anabhisvanga' means absence of becoming absorbed in them by identifying with their joys and sorrows. In the attainment of the desirable and undesirable ('istanistopapattisu'), maintaining constant even-mindedness by contemplating the divine will.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
'Asakti' — Sakti means mere mineness (mamata) towards son etc. Abhisvanga means identifying oneself with them thinking 'This is I myself', such that in the happiness of son etc. 'I myself am happy' and in his sorrow 'I myself am sorrowful'. The rejection (abandonment) of both sakti and abhisvanga is the meaning. Even-mindedness means freedom from exultation and grief. Where? On the attainment of the desirable and undesirable, i.e. absence of exultation on attaining the desirable and absence of grief on attaining the undesirable.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Non-attachment to children, wife, home, and the rest, and evenmindedness amid desired and undesired events;

 This process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less intelligent men as being the interaction of the field of activity. But actually this is the real process of knowledge. If one accepts this process, then the possibility of approaching the Absolute Truth exists. This is not the interaction of the twenty-four elements, as described before. This is actually the means to get out of the entanglement of those elements. The embodied soul is entrapped by the body, which is a casing made of the twenty-four elements, and the process of knowledge as described here is the means to get out of it. Of all the descriptions of the process of knowledge, the most important point is described in the first line of the eleventh verse. Mayi cānanya-yogena bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī: the process of knowledge terminates in unalloyed devotional service to the Lord. So if one does not approach, or is not able to approach, the transcendental service of the Lord, then the other nineteen items are of no particular value. But if one takes to devotional service in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the other nineteen items automatically develop within him. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.12) , yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ. All the good qualities of knowledge develop in one who has attained the stage of devotional service. The principle of accepting a spiritual master, as mentioned in the eighth verse, is essential. Even for one who takes to devotional service, it is most important. Transcendental life begins when one accepts a bona fide spiritual master. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, clearly states here that this process of knowledge is the actual path. Anything speculated beyond this is nonsense. As for the knowledge outlined here, the items may be analyzed as follows. Humility means that one should not be anxious to have the satisfaction of being honored by others. The material conception of life makes us very eager to receive honor from others, but from the point of view of a man in perfect knowledge – who knows that he is not this body – anything, honor or dishonor, pertaining to this body is useless. One should not be hankering after this material deception. People are very anxious to be famous for their religion, and consequently sometimes it is found that without understanding the principles of religion one enters into some group which is not actually following religious principles and then wants to advertise himself as a religious mentor. As for actual advancement in spiritual science, one should have a test to see how far he is progressing. He can judge by these items. Nonviolence is generally taken to mean not killing or destroying the body, but actually nonviolence means not to put others into distress. People in general are trapped by ignorance in the material concept of life, and they perpetually suffer material pains. So unless one elevates people to spiritual knowledge, one is practicing violence. One should try his best to distribute real knowledge to the people, so that they may become enlightened and leave this material entanglement. That is nonviolence. Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult and dishonor from others. If one is engaged in the advancement of spiritual knowledge, there will be so many insults and much dishonor from others. This is expected because material nature is so constituted. Even a boy like Prahlāda, who, only five years old, was engaged in the cultivation of spiritual knowledge, was endangered when his father became antagonistic to his devotion. The father tried to kill him in so many ways, but Prahlāda tolerated him. So there may be many impediments to making advancement in spiritual knowledge, but we should be tolerant and continue our progress with determination. Simplicity means that without diplomacy one should be so straightforward that he can disclose the real truth even to an enemy. As for acceptance of the spiritual master, that is essential, because without the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master one cannot progress in the spiritual science. One should approach the spiritual master with all humility and offer him all services so that he will be pleased to bestow his blessings upon the disciple. Because a bona fide spiritual master is a representative of Kṛṣṇa, if he bestows any blessings upon his disciple, that will make the disciple immediately advanced without the disciple’s following the regulative principles. Or, the regulative principles will be easier for one who has served the spiritual master without reservation. Cleanliness is essential for making advancement in spiritual life. There are two kinds of cleanliness: external and internal. External cleanliness means taking a bath, but for internal cleanliness one has to think of Kṛṣṇa always and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. This process cleans the accumulated dust of past karma from the mind. Steadiness means that one should be very determined to make progress in spiritual life. Without such determination, one cannot make tangible progress. And self-control means that one should not accept anything which is detrimental to the path of spiritual progress. One should become accustomed to this and reject anything which is against the path of spiritual progress. This is real renunciation. The senses are so strong that they are always anxious to have sense gratification. One should not cater to these demands, which are not necessary. The senses should only be gratified to keep the body fit so that one can discharge his duty in advancing in spiritual life. The most important and uncontrollable sense is the tongue. If one can control the tongue, then there is every possibility of controlling the other senses. The function of the tongue is to taste and to vibrate. Therefore, by systematic regulation, the tongue should always be engaged in tasting the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Kṛṣṇa and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. As far as the eyes are concerned, they should not be allowed to see anything but the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa. That will control the eyes. Similarly, the ears should be engaged in hearing about Kṛṣṇa and the nose in smelling the flowers offered to Kṛṣṇa. This is the process of devotional service, and it is understood here that Bhagavad-gītā is simply expounding the science of devotional service. Devotional service is the main and sole objective. Unintelligent commentators on the Bhagavad-gītā try to divert the mind of the reader to other subjects, but there is no other subject in Bhagavad-gītā than devotional service. False ego means accepting this body as oneself. When one understands that he is not his body and is spirit soul, he comes to his real ego. Ego is there. False ego is condemned, but not real ego. In the Vedic literature ( Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.10) it is said, ahaṁ brahmāsmi: I am Brahman, I am spirit. This “I am,” the sense of self, also exists in the liberated stage of self-realization. This sense of “I am” is ego, but when the sense of “I am” is applied to this false body it is false ego. When the sense of self is applied to reality, that is real ego. There are some philosophers who say we should give up our ego, but we cannot give up our ego, because ego means identity. We ought, of course, to give up the false identification with the body. One should try to understand the distress of accepting birth, death, old age and disease. There are descriptions in various Vedic literatures of birth. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the world of the unborn, the child’s stay in the womb of the mother, its suffering, etc., are all very graphically described. It should be thoroughly understood that birth is distressful. Because we forget how much distress we have suffered within the womb of the mother, we do not make any solution to the repetition of birth and death. Similarly at the time of death there are all kinds of sufferings, and they are also mentioned in the authoritative scriptures. These should be discussed. And as far as disease and old age are concerned, everyone gets practical experience. No one wants to be diseased, and no one wants to become old, but there is no avoiding these. Unless we have a pessimistic view of this material life, considering the distresses of birth, death, old age and disease, there is no impetus for our making advancement in spiritual life. As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant that one should have no feeling for these. They are natural objects of affection. But when they are not favorable to spiritual progress, then one should not be attached to them. The best process for making the home pleasant is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one is in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he can make his home very happy, because this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very easy. One need only chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Kṛṣṇa, have some discussion on books like Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , and engage oneself in Deity worship. These four things will make one happy. One should train the members of his family in this way. The family members can sit down morning and evening and chant together Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. If one can mold his family life in this way to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness, following these four principles, then there is no need to change from family life to renounced life. But if it is not congenial, not favorable for spiritual advancement, then family life should be abandoned. One must sacrifice everything to realize or serve Kṛṣṇa, just as Arjuna did. Arjuna did not want to kill his family members, but when he understood that these family members were impediments to his Kṛṣṇa realization, he accepted the instruction of Kṛṣṇa and fought and killed them. In all cases, one should be detached from the happiness and distress of family life, because in this world one can never be fully happy or fully miserable. Happiness and distress are concomitant factors of material life. One should learn to tolerate, as advised in Bhagavad-gītā . One can never restrict the coming and going of happiness and distress, so one should be detached from the materialistic way of life and be automatically equipoised in both cases. Generally, when we get something desirable we are very happy, and when we get something undesirable we are distressed. But if we are actually in the spiritual position these things will not agitate us. To reach that stage, we have to practice unbreakable devotional service. Devotional service to Kṛṣṇa without deviation means engaging oneself in the nine processes of devotional service – chanting, hearing, worshiping, offering respect, etc. – as described in the last verse of the Ninth Chapter. That process should be followed. Naturally, when one is adapted to the spiritual way of life, he will not want to mix with materialistic men. That would go against his grain. One may test himself by seeing how far he is inclined to live in a solitary place, without unwanted association. Naturally a devotee has no taste for unnecessary sporting or cinema-going or enjoying some social function, because he understands that these are simply a waste of time. There are many research scholars and philosophers who study sex life or some other subject, but according to Bhagavad-gītā such research work and philosophical speculation have no value. That is more or less nonsensical. According to Bhagavad-gītā , one should make research, by philosophical discretion, into the nature of the soul. One should make research to understand the self. That is recommended here. As far as self-realization is concerned, it is clearly stated here that bhakti-yoga is especially practical. As soon as there is a question of devotion, one must consider the relationship between the Supersoul and the individual soul. The individual soul and the Supersoul cannot be one, at least not in the bhakti conception, the devotional conception of life. This service of the individual soul to the Supreme Soul is eternal, nityam, as it is clearly stated. So bhakti, or devotional service, is eternal. One should be established in that philosophical conviction. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11) this is explained. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam. “Those who are actually knowers of the Absolute Truth know that the Self is realized in three different phases, as Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān.” Bhagavān is the last word in the realization of the Absolute Truth; therefore one should reach up to that platform of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus engage in the devotional service of the Lord. That is the perfection of knowledge. Beginning from practicing humility up to the point of realization of the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, this process is just like a staircase beginning from the ground floor and going up to the top floor. Now on this staircase there are so many people who have reached the first floor, the second or the third floor, etc., but unless one reaches the top floor, which is the understanding of Kṛṣṇa, he is at a lower stage of knowledge. If anyone wants to compete with God and at the same time make advancement in spiritual knowledge, he will be frustrated. It is clearly stated that without humility, understanding is not truly possible. To think oneself God is most puffed up. Although the living entity is always being kicked by the stringent laws of material nature, he still thinks, “I am God” because of ignorance. The beginning of knowledge, therefore, is amānitva, humility. One should be humble and know that he is subordinate to the Supreme Lord. Due to rebellion against the Supreme Lord, one becomes subordinate to material nature. One must know and be convinced of this truth.