Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
sattvātsañjāyate jñānaṃ rajaso lobha eva ca .
pramādamohau tamaso bhavato.ajñānameva ca

Word Meanings:
सत्त्वात् - from purity
सञ्जायते - arises
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
रजसः - from activity
लोभः - greed
एव - even
च - and
प्रमादमोहौ - heedlessness and delusion
तमसः - from inertia
अज्ञानम् - ignorance
एव - even
च - and.

Life Application:
From goodness arises wisdom; from passion arises greed; from ignorance arise heedlessness, delusion, and blindness.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
From Sattva arises knowledge; greed from Rajas; and inadvertence, delusion, and ignorance arise from Tamas.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
From Sattva arises knowledge, and greed from Rajas; heedlessness and delusion arise from Tamas, and also ignorance.

सत्त्वात् from purity? सञ्जायते arises? ज्ञानम् knowledge? रजसः from activity? लोभः greed? एव even? च and? प्रमादमोहौ heedlessness and delusion? तमसः from inertia? अज्ञानम् ignorance? एव even? च and.Commentary From Sattva When Sattva becomes predominant. Sattva awakesn knowledge just as the sun causes daylight. Sattva enlightens the intellect.Greed is insatiable like fire. Greed brings misery and pain. Greed is born of Rajas. Rajas creates insatiable desire. Rajas makes one blind to the interests and the feelings of others. A Rajasic man treats others as tools to be utilised for his own selfadvancement or selfaggrandisement.Tamas produces shortsightedness? torpor and ignorance. A Tamasic man does not think a bit of the future conseences. He completely identifies himself with the body and begins to fight with people if they injure his body or speak ill of him. He is ready to do any sinful act in retaliation. He has no sense of proportion and no sense of balance or poise.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Purity engenders Wisdom, Passion avarice, and Ignorance folly, infatuation and darkness.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
What role these three gunas play when they enter the stage of the mind and intellect is indicated in this verse. Their detailed description has already been given earlier. From Sattva arises Knowledge — Consciousness itself, being the Self, has no objects to know, hence there is no question of It knowing any object. But the mental modifications of the intellect, endowed with Consciousness, illumine objects. If the mind is pure and quiet, i.e., sattvic, its capacity for knowledge is greater. Only through such a pure mind can the direct experience of the Ever-Pure-Wise-Free Self be attained. From Rajas arises Greed, and from it arise various self-centered activities and distractions. From Tamas arise Heedlessness, Delusion, and Ignorance. Not knowing an object at all is Ignorance, whereas the lack of discrimination between two objects or actions is called Delusion. Lack of discrimination between Dharma and Adharma, Truth and Untruth, Self and Non-Self, etc., is Delusion. Carelessness in any action or misinterpreting a thing is called Heedlessness (Pramada). Because of this, imagining happiness in the external world, man keeps wandering in it. Can even a cupful of sweet water be found in the entire ocean? Indeed not! But a person under the sway of Tamas keeps striving for it, and when he has to suffer sorrow, he blames the world. All this is the effect of Tamas. Next He says:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
From the Sattva arises wisdom; from the Rajas only greed; and from the Tamas arise negligence, delusion and also ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
From the Sattva arises knowledge, and from Rajas greed, from Tamas arise negligence and delusion, and, indeed ignorance.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
From sattva is born knowledge [Knowledge acired through the sense-organs.], and from rajas, verily, avarice. From tamas are born inadvertence and delusion as also ignorance, to be sure.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Briefly showing the characteristics of Sattva etc., in terms of prescribed and prohibited knowledge and actions, he says: 'Further...' Knowledge is that which arises through all instruments (sense organs). Ignorance is the absence of discrimination.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
From the mode of goodness (Sattva) arises knowledge, and from the mode of passion (Rajas) arises greed, etc.; from the mode of ignorance (Tamas) arise inadvertence, delusion, and also ignorance.

Commentary — Sattvātsanjāyate jñānam — From Sattvaguna arises knowledge, meaning discrimination between good and evil actions is awakened. With that discrimination, man performs only good, righteous actions. The fruit of those righteous actions is sattvic and pure.
Rajasō lōbha eva ca — From Rajoguna arise greed, etc. The actions performed by man impelled by greed lead to sorrow as their fruit. Wanting an increase in whatever one has received is called greed. Greed has two forms — not spending appropriately, and accumulating by improper means. By not spending money on proper causes and withholding it, restlessness and turmoil remain in man's mind; and by accumulating money improperly, i.e., through falsehood, deceit, etc., sins are accrued, resulting in suffering in hells and among 8.4 million species. From this perspective, the fruit of rajasic actions is sorrow.
Pramādamōhau tamasō bhavatō'jñānamēva ca — From Tamoguna arise inadvertence, delusion, and ignorance. When these three enter the intellect, actions contrary to discrimination take place (Gita 18.32), due to which ignorance increases and becomes firmly established.
Here, ignorance is said to be born from Tamoguna, whereas in verse 8 of this chapter, Tamoguna was said to be born from ignorance. The meaning is that just as seeds are produced from a tree and many trees are produced from those seeds, similarly ignorance is born from Tamoguna and Tamoguna grows and becomes nourished by ignorance.
Earlier in verse 8, the Lord mentioned three things — inadvertence, laziness, and sleep. But in verse 13 and here, inadvertence is mentioned, but sleep is not mentioned. This proves that necessary sleep is neither tamasic nor prohibited, nor binding. Because necessary sleep for the body comes to a sattvic person as well as to a person who has transcended the gunas. In reality, excessive sleep alone is binding, prohibited, and tamasic, because excessive sleep increases laziness in the body, creates a desire to remain lying down, and wastes a lot of time.

Special Note — Although this jiva is a direct part of the Supreme Self, when it establishes a relationship with Nature (Prakriti), it gets connected with the gunas born of Prakriti. Then according to the gunas, mental modes (vrittis) arise in its inner instrument. Actions happen according to those vrittis, and the fruits of these actions are higher or lower destinations. The point is that during life, favorable and unfavorable circumstances arise, and after death, higher or lower states are attained. In reality, at the root of those actions too are the modes of the gunas, which are the main cause for rebirth (Gita 13.21). The meaning is that association with the gunas is no less potent than actions. Just as actions yield auspicious or inauspicious fruits, similarly association with the gunas also yields auspicious or inauspicious fruits (Gita 8.6). Therefore, in this section from verses 5 to 18, the fruit of the increase of temporary modes of gunas was explained in verses 14 and 15, and the circumstances occurring during life were explained in verse 16, and further in verse 18, the fruit of permanent modes of gunas will be explained. Thus, gunas are main in causing vrittis and actions. The central point regarding the gunas in this entire section is stated in this very (17th) verse.
One whose goal is not the world, but God, is not situated in Prakriti like ordinary men. Therefore, he is not subject to the sway of Prakriti-born gunas; and as spiritual practice continues, when egoism changes and firm determination of the goal is attained, he experiences his self-evident nature beyond the gunas. This is called awakening (bodha). Regarding this awakening, the Lord spoke verses 1 and 2 of this chapter, and regarding the one who has transcended the gunas (gunatita), He spoke five verses from 22 to 26. Thus, this entire chapter has been spoken to experience the self-evident nature beyond the gunas.

Connection — The destination after death of those who die when temporary gunas increase was described in verses 14 and 15, but what destination is attained (after death) by those in whose life Sattva, Rajas, or Tamas predominates — this is described in the next verse.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
From the increase of Sattva, knowledge i.e., 'true and direct knowledge' of the self arises. From Rajas develops likewise 'intense desire' for heaven etc. From Tamas similarly develops 'negligence' leading to evil deeds; and from this, delusion, i.e., erroneous knowledge; and from that still more Tamas; and thence ignorance, namely absence of knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 14.16–14.20 jointly): Karmanah etc. upto asnute.  Here, there are certain unconnected verses that have been concocted.  They are of the nature of repetition, and hence they have to be necessarily rejected.  A mode of life transcending these Strands turn to be nothing but emancipation.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Sattvat, from sattva, when it predominates; sanjayate, is born; jnanam, knowledge; and rajasah, from rajas; is verily born lobhah, avarice. Tamasah, from tamas; bhavatah, are born; both pramada-mohau, in-advertence and delusion; as also ajnanam, ignorance [Absence of discrimination.]; eva ca, to be sure.
Further,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
'Then what is the pure fruit produced by Sattva etc.?' To this he says: 'From Sattva...' From Sattva arises direct knowledge of the reality of things. From Rajas arises greed for fruits such as heaven, while from Tamas arise inadvertence, delusion, and absence of knowledge of the Truth.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
For such variety of fruits, he states the very reason mentioned earlier — Knowledge in the form of illumination occurring through all sense-organs is born from Sattva; therefore, corresponding to it, the fruit of sattvic action is happiness filled with illumination. From Rajas arises greed, a special desire that cannot be satisfied even by obtaining millions of sense-objects. Since that ever-increasing and unfillable desire is always the cause of sorrow, the action born of Rajas has sorrow as its fruit. Similarly, from Tamas arise inadvertence (pramada) and delusion (moha), as also ignorance. The word 'eva' (only) is used to exclude illumination and activity. Therefore, it is appropriate that the fruit of tamasic action is predominantly tamasic knowledge etc. Here, ignorance means non-illumination, while inadvertence and delusion have already been explained as non-illumination and non-activity.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
He states the reason for that very matter — 'From Sattva...' From Sattva arises knowledge; hence the fruit of sattvic action is happiness rich in illumination. From Rajas arises greed, and since greed is the cause of sorrow, action preceded by it yields sorrow as its fruit. From Tamas arise inadvertence, delusion, and ignorance; hence it is appropriate that the fruit of tamasic action leads to ignorance.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
'How does such variety of fruit arise from the gunas?' In response to this expectation, he says: 'From Sattva...' From Sattva, which has manifested by suppressing Rajas and Tamas, knowledge arises. From Rajas, which has manifested by suppressing Sattva and Tamas, greed arises. The word 'ca' (and) is used to combine activity etc., while 'eva' (only) is to exclude exception. Similarly, from Tamas, which has arisen by suppressing Rajas and Sattva, inadvertence and delusion arise, as well as ignorance. The meaning of indeclinables is as before. Thus, the fruit of action which is the effect of Sattva (the producer of illumination) is appropriately happiness abundant in illumination; the fruit of action which is the effect of Rajas (the producer of greed etc.) is appropriately filled with sorrow; and the fruit of action which is the effect of Tamas (the producer of inadvertence etc.) is appropriately filled with ignorance — this is the intended meaning.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
'In the absence of knowledge of the essential nature, how is it possible to perform such actions?' To this doubt he says: 'From Sattva...' From Sattva knowledge arises, because only that which is endowed with such nature gets manifested. Likewise, from Rajas arises greed, which is the root of sin; and since greed is of the nature of sorrow, that very sorrow results. From Tamas arise inadvertence and delusion; and from those two, ignorance alone arises — this is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
For such variety of fruit, he states the very reason mentioned earlier — 'From Sattva...'

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of passion, greed develops; and from the mode of ignorance develop foolishness, madness and illusion.

 Since the present civilization is not very congenial to the living entities, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is recommended. Through Kṛṣṇa consciousness, society will develop the mode of goodness. When the mode of goodness is developed, people will see things as they are. In the mode of ignorance, people are just like animals and cannot see things clearly. In the mode of ignorance, for example, they do not see that by killing one animal they are taking the chance of being killed by the same animal in the next life. Because people have no education in actual knowledge, they become irresponsible. To stop this irresponsibility, education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in general must be there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness, they will become sober, in full knowledge of things as they are. Then people will be happy and prosperous. Even if the majority of the people aren’t happy and prosperous, if a certain percentage of the population develops Kṛṣṇa consciousness and becomes situated in the mode of goodness, then there is the possibility for peace and prosperity all over the world. Otherwise, if the world is devoted to the modes of passion and ignorance, there can be no peace or prosperity. In the mode of passion, people become greedy, and their hankering for sense enjoyment has no limit. One can see that even if one has enough money and adequate arrangements for sense gratification, there is neither happiness nor peace of mind. That is not possible, because one is situated in the mode of passion. If one wants happiness at all, his money will not help him; he has to elevate himself to the mode of goodness by practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When one is engaged in the mode of passion, not only is he mentally unhappy, but his profession and occupation are also very troublesome. He has to devise so many plans and schemes to acquire enough money to maintain his status quo. This is all miserable. In the mode of ignorance, people become mad. Being distressed by their circumstances, they take shelter of intoxication, and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their future in life is very dark.