Speaker: Sanjaya

Slok:
anekavaktranayanamanekādbhutadarśanam .
anekadivyābharaṇaṃ divyānekodyatāyudham

Word Meanings:
अनेकवक्त्रनयनम् - with numerous mouthsand eyes
अनेकाद्भुतदर्शनम् - with numerous wonderful sights
अनेकदिव्याभरणम् - with numerous divine ornaments
दिव्यानेकोद्यतायुधम् - with numerous divine weapons

Life Application:
Behold the infinite faces, eyes, wondrous sights, divine ornaments, and uplifted weapons of the cosmic form.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
(Arjuna saw the Lord) possessing many mouths and eyes, presenting many wonderful sights, adorned with numerous divine ornaments, and holding many divine weapons raised in hands.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
With numerous mouths and eyes, with numerous wonderful sights, with numerous divine ornaments, with numerous divine weapons uplifted (such a form He showed).

अनेकवक्त्रनयनम् with numerous mouthsand eyes? अनेकाद्भुतदर्शनम् with numerous wonderful sights? अनेकदिव्याभरणम् with numerous divine ornaments? दिव्यानेकोद्यतायुधम् with numerous divine weapons uplifted.Commentary Countless faces appeared there. Arjuna looked at this Cosmic Form in all its magnificence. He saw the Lord everywhere and in everything. The whole manifestation appeared as one gigantic body of the Lord. He saw the Lord as the allinall.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
There were countless eyes and mouths, and mystic forms innumerable, with shining ornaments and flaming celestial weapons.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
See commentary under 11.11

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
That has many mouths and eyes, many wondrous sights, many heavenly ornaments, and many heavenly weapons held ready;

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
With innumerable mouths and eyes, many marvellous aspects, many divine    ornaments and many divine weapons.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Having many faces and eyes, possessing many wonderful sights, adorned with numerous celestial ornaments, holding many uplifted heavenly weapons;

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Hari is so called because He accepts the share of all sacrifices. As stated in Moksha Dharma: 'In households I am called Ida, and I take my share in sacrifices. My complexion is beautiful green, therefore I am remembered as Hari.'

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
He describes that very form beginning with 'aneka...' (many...). Divine ornaments etc. refer to necklaces, armlets, and other decorations. Uplifted (udyatāni) means raised high.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
The Lord showed (His divine form) which has many mouths and eyes, many wonderful sights, many divine ornaments, many divine weapons raised in hands, wearing divine garlands, clad in divine garments, and whose forehead and body are anointed with divine sandalwood paste, saffron, etc., which is completely wonderful, infinite, and facing in all directions.

Commentary--'anekavaktranayanam'—All the mouths and eyes visible in the cosmic form shown by the Lord are divine. All the mouths, eyes, hands, feet, etc. of all the living beings visible in the cosmic form belong to the cosmic form of the Lord. The reason is that the Lord Himself has manifested as the cosmic form. 'anekādbhutadarśanam'—All the forms, shapes, colors, and their wonderful compositions visible in the cosmic form of the Lord appear marvellous. 'anekadivyābharaṇam'—All the ornaments on the hands, feet, ears, noses, and necks of the many forms visible in the cosmic form are divine. The reason is that the Lord Himself has manifested in the form of ornaments. 'divyānekodyatāyudham'—All the weapons (arms and missiles) like discus, mace, bow, arrows, iron club, etc., raised by the Lord of the cosmic form in His hands are divine. 'divyamālyāmbaradharam'—The Lord of the cosmic form has worn various kinds of garlands made of flowers, gold, silver, pearls, gems, seeds, etc., around His neck. All of them are divine. He has worn garments of various colors like red, yellow, green, white, brown, etc., on His bodies, all of which are divine. 'divyagandhānulepanam'—All the marks made with musk, sandalwood, saffron, etc., on the foreheads of the Lord of the cosmic form, and all the ointments applied to the body, are divine. 'sarvāścaryamayaṃ devamanantaṃ viśvatomukham'—Thus, the Lord showed Arjuna His supreme, glorious form, which is astonishing to behold, infinite, and has faces on all sides.
For example, if a person sitting far away contemplates in his mind that he is in Haridwar and bathing in the Ganges, then at that time he begins to see the Ganges, the bridge, the men and women standing on the ghat, etc., and also sees himself bathing in the Ganges. In reality, neither Haridwar nor the Ganges is there; but his mind itself appears to him as all those forms. Similarly, the one Lord alone has manifested in the form of many shapes, the ornaments worn on those shapes, various kinds of weapons, various kinds of garlands, and various kinds of garments. Therefore, everything in the cosmic form of the Lord is divine. It is stated in Srimad Bhagavatam that when Brahmaji stole the calves and cowherd boys, Lord Krishna Himself became the calves and cowherd boys. Not only the calves and cowherd boys, but He Himself also became their canes, horns, flutes, clothes, ornaments, etc. (Srimad Bhagavatam 10.13.19).

Connection--Now Sanjaya describes the splendor of the cosmic form.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Divyam' means resplendent. 'Anantam' (boundless) means that form is not limited by time and space because of its being the foundation of the entire universe in the past, present and future. 'Visvatomukham' means facing in all directions. This form is adorned with divine raiments, perfumes, garlands, ornaments and weapons appropriate to it.

He explains the same resplendence expressed by the term 'Divyam':

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
A form aneka-vaktra-nayanam, having many faces and eyes; aneka-adbhuta-darsanam, possessing many wonderful sights; as also aneka-divya-abharanam, adorned with numerous celestial ornaments; and divya-aneka-udyata-ayudham, holding many uplifted heavenly weapons. This whole portion is connected with the verb '(He) showed' in the earlier verse.
 
Moreover,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
In the phrase 'mahāyogeśvaro hariḥ', he explains the appropriate meaning of the word 'Hari' in this context: 'harir iti'. 'geheṣu' means in the houses where sacrifices are performed. The word 'Hari' is derived from the root 'hṛ' (to take/steal) with the suffix 'i'. 'śreṣṭhaḥ' means supernatural or non-material. What then is there to say about His being the Great Lord of Yoga, when His divine, embodied form is simultaneously present in His true nature at infinite places of worship?

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Listen to how that form is: the descriptions of the form start from 'aneka-vaktra-nayanam' up to 'viśvatomukham'. It should be understood that this form was shown like the form of Mahakala Purusha, worshipped by those on the path of Vedic boundaries (maryādā-mārga), having hands and feet everywhere, supernatural, of the nature of the collective Purusha (Samashti Purusha), immutable, the cause of all causes, and beyond attributes (Nirguna). The word 'divyam' (divine) is clear. The garments (ambaram) are of the nature of the Vedas/illusion (chandomāyā), the crown and other ornaments are of the nature of the supreme state (parameṣṭhi), and the weapons are of the nature of the five elements (pañcabhoot-tattva). He showed His cosmic form, which faces all sides and possesses incomparable splendor.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
He describes that very form beginning with 'aneka...'. The form which has many mouths and eyes; in which there is the sight of many wonderful things that cause astonishment; in which there are many divine ornaments; and in which there are many divine, wonderful weapons.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
To describe what kind of form it is, he says 'aneka...'. That which has many mouths and eyes; that in which there is the sight of many wonders; that in which there are many divine ornaments; and that in which there are many divine, uplifted weapons.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
He describes the supreme divine form. The form which has many mouths and eyes; in which there are many astonishing sights; similarly, in which there are many divine, extraordinary ornaments like armlets (angada), etc.; similarly, in which there are many divine uplifted weapons and sights; similarly, in which there are many divine, extraordinary ornaments like armlets, etc.; similarly, in which there are many divine, uplifted weapons. This is connected with the verb '(He) showed' from the previous verse.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The multiplicity in garments, ornaments, and weapons is to be understood also from the variety of their kinds. Indeed, in the scriptures of the Lord, the meditation on the cosmic form (Vishvarupa) describes the possession of many faces of various kinds; otherwise, the mention of having many eyes would be redundant, since it would be established by the multiplicity of faces itself. 'anekādbhutadarśanam' means that which has many wonderful sights, that is, it is seen as possessing limitless and supreme wonder. Divinity (divyatva) means being non-material (aprakritatva). 'sarvāścaryamayam' means being the support of all elements that are of the nature of wonders. Hence, there is no redundancy with 'anekādbhutadarśanam'. One should contemplate on texts like 'He, the Great Soul, whose form is this immensely wonderful world' (Vishnu Purana 5.19.7). The word 'devam' is explained as 'dyotamānam' (resplendent) in order to reject its usage as referring merely to a specific species (like demigods) which is irrelevant here, and to show that it refers to His specific divine body. He explains the manner of His being infinite (ananta) and the reason for it by saying 'nikhila...' (entire...) etc. Since His supporting the entire universe is explicitly stated, His being the support of all that exists in the three periods of time is also implied. As a result of both, the quality of not being limited by space and time is here, as far as possible, either through the body (vigraha) or directly. Infinitude is inherent to His nature. Since it stands in the midst of adjectives describing His body, the word 'ananta' also refers to His body. In 11.20, 'dṛṣṭvādbhutam...', it will indeed describe the form as 'infinite in length and width, wonderful and very fierce', which refers to His body. Others say the intent is only to show extreme width/size. Thus, the reference to 'infinite length and width' to be mentioned later is also to be understood in this way. For this body which pervades the universe, non-obstruction everywhere is logical due to His special power. Even for yogis endowed with the eight siddhis, a special power called 'rising and sinking in the earth' is described. Therefore, His supporting the entire universe beginning with Prakriti, which is to be described later, is not unreasonable. Hence, it should not be doubted that He is said here to be the support of all in the form of weapons and ornaments, because there, it is logically used as an adjective of the body, like 'the body of the God of gods having infinite length and width'. Nor can it be argued that, like the form lying on a banyan leaf, the inclusion of everything is shown in a subtle form or in a very small space by the power of making the impossible possible (aghatita-ghatana-shakti); for it is not so stated, and indeed the opposite is declared. Therefore, the literal meaning is correct. And this has been established in the introductory commentary itself by the word 'acintya' (inconceivable). Believing that the expression 'many faces' (aneka-vaktra) is further qualified here by the word 'viśvatomukham' (facing all sides), he says 'faces existing in all directions of the universe'. Since it refers directly to His body, the power of having faces everywhere (as in Upanishadic passages like 'with eyes on all sides, with faces on all sides') is not what is intended here. The interpretation of others (like Shankara) that it means 'possessing faces everywhere' is inappropriate, because there are no faces on hands, feet, etc. This is the sense. Ignoring the order of the text, he first explained 'devam' etc. in order of clarity of perception. Since the perception of attributes belonging to Himself comes first, and only after that comes the perception of Him being qualified by separately existing objects (like garments, ornaments, etc.), showing it in that manner is appropriate; with this intention, although garments, etc., were mentioned earlier, they are explained later by 'svocita...' (appropriate to Himself) etc. Here too, the mention of garments, etc. by violating the textual order is to show the distinction between internal (intimate) and external attributes. Here, this is connected with the verb 'darśayāmāsa' from the previous verse.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
He describes the nature of both with 'aneka...'. The form which has many mouths and eyes, accompanied by forms of all divine pastimes (lilas). 'aneka-adbhuta-darśanam' refers to the form in which there are many extraordinary, pastime-filled sights. The form in which there are many divine, extraordinary ornaments. The form in which there are many divine, extraordinary, uplifted weapons like the conch, mace, etc., which remove all miseries.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He describes that very form with two verses starting with 'aneka...'. 'aneka-vaktra-nayanam' means that form in which there are many, infinite mouths and eyes. 'aneka-adbhuta-darśanam' means that form in which there are many wonderful sights. The form in which there are many divine ornaments. The form in which there are many divine, uplifted weapons like the discus (chakra), etc.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited faces, eyes, and wonderful visions. The form was decorated with many celestial ornaments and held many uplifted divine weapons.

 In these two verses the repeated use of the word many indicates that there was no limit to the number of hands, mouths, legs and other manifestations Arjuna was seeing. These manifestations were distributed throughout the universe, but by the grace of the Lord, Arjuna could see them while sitting in one place. That was due to the inconceivable potency of Kṛṣṇa.