Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
tasmāttvamuttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṃ samṛddham .
mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvameva nimittamātraṃ bhava savyasācin

Word Meanings:
तस्मात् - therefore
त्वम् - thou
उत्तिष्ठ - stand up
यशः - fame
लभस्व - obtain
जित्वा - having conquered
शत्रून् - enemies
भुङ्क्ष्व - enjoy
राज्यम् - the kingdom
समृद्धम् - the unrivalled
मया - by Me
एव - even
एते - these
निहताः - have been slain
पूर्वम् - before
एव - even
निमित्तमात्रम् - a mere instrument
भव - be
सव्यसाचिन् - O ambidexterous one.

Life Application:
Stand up and act as an instrument of divine purpose, knowing that destiny has already ordained the outcome.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Therefore rise up and attain fame; conquering the enemies, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. All these have already been slain by Me. O Savyasachin, you be a mere instrument.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Therefore, stand up and obtain fame. Coner the enemies and enjoy the unrivalled kingdom. Verily by Me have they been already slain; be thou a mere instrument, O Arjuna.

तस्मात् therefore? त्वम् thou? उत्तिष्ठ stand up? यशः fame? लभस्व obtain? जित्वा having conered? शत्रून् enemies? भुङ्क्ष्व enjoy? राज्यम् the kingdom? समृद्धम् the unrivalled? मया by Me? एव even? एते these? निहताः have been slain? पूर्वम् before? एव even? निमित्तमात्रम् a mere instrument? भव be? सव्यसाचिन् O ambidexterous one.Commentary Be thou merely an apparent or nominal cause. I have already killed them in advance. I have destroyed them long ago.Fame People will think that Bhishma? Drona and the other great warriors whom even the gods cannot kill have been defeated by you and so you will obtain great fame. Such fame is due to virtuous Karma only.Satrun Enemies such as Duryodhana.Savyasachi Arjuna who could shoot arrows even with the left hand.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Then gird up thy loins and conquer. Subdue thy foes and enjoy the kingdom in prosperity. I have already doomed them. Be thou my instrument, Arjuna!

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
See commentary under 11.34

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Therefore, stand up, win glory, and  vanishing foes, enjoy the rich kingdom; these [foes] have already been killed by Myself;  [hence] be a mere token cause [in their destruction],  O ambidextrous archer !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Therefore airse, win glory. Conering your foes, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. By Me they have been slain already. You be merely an instrument, O Arjuna, you great bowman!

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Therefore you rise up, (and) gain fame; and defeating the enemies, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. These have been killed verily by Me even earlier; be you merely an instrument, O Savyasacin (Arjuna).

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Since it is certain that even in your indifference, those standing in the opposing army will not survive due to their opposition to Me, therefore your indifference is of no avail. Explaining this, He says 'tasmāt' (therefore). 'Rise up' means become ready for battle. He illustrates the acquisition of fame by mentioning Bhishma and others. Anticipating the objection, 'What is the use of that fame which is not a supreme goal of life?', he says, 'by meritorious deeds' (such fame is attained only by merits). Anticipating the objection, 'If the enjoyment of the kingdom is desired, what is the use of conquering?', he says, 'by defeating (the enemies)'. Anticipating the objection, 'When there are great warriors like Bhishma and others, how can there be any hope of victory?', he says, 'Verily by Me alone...'. 'Then I have no inclination to kill those who are already dead'; to this, He says, 'be an instrument'. He explains the word 'Savyasācī' as 'with the left hand' (one who shoots arrows with the left hand).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Therefore, stand up for battle and obtain fame; and conquering the enemies, enjoy a prosperous kingdom, rich in wealth and grains. All of these have already been slain by Me. O Savyasachin (ambidextrous one)! Become a mere instrument.

Commentary: 'tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva' — O Arjuna! When you have already seen that even without your killing them, these opponents will not survive, then gird up your loins and stand up for battle, and obtain fame for free. The meaning is that all this is bound to happen, which will happen anyway, and I have shown this to you directly. Therefore, if you fight, you will get fame for free, and people will also say that Arjuna has won the victory.

The phrase 'yaśo labhasva' (obtain fame) does not mean that upon gaining fame you should become inflated with pride that 'Wow! I have won the victory', rather you should understand that just as these opponents will die having already been slain by Me, similarly the fame which is to come will also come. If you rejoice in fame considering it to be achieved by your own self-effort, you will be bound by the fruits — 'phale sakto nibadhyate' (Gita 5.12). The implication is that gain-loss, fame-infamy are all in the hands of the Lord. Therefore, a person should not associate himself with them, because they are bound to happen.

'jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṃ samṛddham' — In a prosperous kingdom, there are two things: (1) the kingdom is free from enemies (uncontested), meaning there is no enemy or opponent to cause obstacles, and (2) the kingdom is rich in wealth and grains, meaning the subjects possess abundant wealth and property, and there is an abundance of elephants, horses, cows, land, houses, reservoirs, and other necessary things, and plenty of food for the subjects. By these two factors, the prosperity and completeness of a kingdom are established. The Lord tells Arjuna to defeat the enemies and enjoy such an uncontested and prosperous kingdom. Here, 'enjoying the kingdom' does not mean enjoying the pleasure of favorable circumstances, but rather that you effortlessly obtain that kingdom which ordinary people regard as an object of enjoyment.

'mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva' — He explains the reason why you will obtain fame and kingdom for free: the lifespan of all those who have come here has ended, which means they have already been slain beforehand by Me in the form of Time.

'nimittamātraṃ bhava savyasācin' — Arjuna was named 'Savyasachi' because he could shoot arrows with his left hand as well, meaning with both right and left hands. Addressing him by this name, the Lord says to Arjuna: shoot arrows with both hands, meaning apply your full strength in the battle, but you must become a mere instrument. Becoming a mere instrument does not mean putting in less strength, intellect, or valor, but rather putting them in fully and carefully. However, one must not have the pride that 'I killed them, I achieved victory', because all these have already been slain by Me beforehand. Therefore, you only have to become an instrument; you do not have to perform any new action.

In performing action as a mere instrument, there should be no deficiency on one's part from any angle, but rather one should work carefully, applying full strength. In the accomplishment of the task, there should not be even the slightest trace of pride. For example, when Lord Sri Krishna lifted the Govardhan Hill, He told the cowherd boys to place their sticks under the mountain. All the cowherd boys put their sticks and began to think that the mountain was staying up only because of their sticks. In reality, the mountain was resting on the nail of the little finger of the Lord's left hand! When this kind of pride arose in the cowherd boys, the Lord lowered His finger slightly. As the finger was lowered, the mountain began to come down, and the cowherd boys cried out to the Lord, 'O brother! We are dead! We are dead! We are dead!' The Lord said, 'Apply your strength forcefully!' But even by putting their entire strength together, they could not lift the mountain. Then the Lord lifted the mountain again with His finger. Similarly, a seeker should apply their full strength, intellect, and ability for God-realization, and should never leave any deficiency in it, but should not be proud by considering strength, effort, ability, promptness, self-control, and hard work as the cause of experiencing God. In that, only the grace of the Lord should be considered the cause. The Lord has also said in the Gita that the attainment of the eternal, imperishable state is by My grace — 'mat-prasādād avāpnoti śāśvataṃ padam avyayam' (18.56), and all obstacles will be crossed by My grace — 'maccittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi' (18.58). This proves that a seeker attains God simply by becoming a mere instrument. When a seeker performs spiritual practice while relying on his own strength, then due to relying on his own strength, he repeatedly experiences failure and there is a delay in attaining the Truth. If the seeker does not have the slightest pride in his own strength, realization occurs immediately. The reason is that God is already eternally attained; it was only due to the pride of one's own effort that He was not being experienced. The removal of this pride of effort is the real meaning of the words 'nimittamātraṃ bhava'.

The pride of doing in actions, 'I do it, so it happens; if I don't do it, it won't happen,' is imposed upon oneself solely due to ignorance. If a person, discarding pride and desire for fruits, becomes a mere instrument in performing duties according to the circumstances obtained, his liberation is self-evident. The reason is that what is destined to happen will happen, no one can stop it with their power; and what is not destined to happen will not happen, no one can do it with their strength and intellect. Therefore, if duty is performed while remaining equal in success and failure, liberation is self-evident. Bondage, reaching hells, and wandering through the eighty-four lakh species of life are all achieved through effort (kṛti-sādhya), whereas liberation, welfare, God-realization, and divine love are all self-evident.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Therefore, arise for fighting against them. Conering your enemies, win glory and enjoy a prosperous and righteous kingdom. All those who have sinned have been already annihilated by Me. Be you merely an instrument (Nimitta) of Mine in destroying them - just like a weapon in my hand, O Savyasacin! The root 'Sac' means 'fastening'. A 'savyasacin' is one who is capable of fixing or fastening the arrow even with his left hand. The meaning is that he is so dexterous that he can fight with a bow in each hand.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 11.33–11.34 jointly): Tasmat etc.  Drona etc.  The world is of the nature of perfect and imperfect knowledge and it is swallowed  (11.completely controlled)  by the power of the perfect,  imperfect and  mixed  Consciousness.   Hence, here an answer is given accordingly by the Bhagavat.  This secret is a almost  indicated in this chapter.  Yet  for the benefit of those  persons who are capable of understanding only what has been clearly marked, let us (11.Ag.)  assume the misfortune of taking the trouble of writing a few lines.
 
What is declared by the Bhagavat - viz.,  'As the foes have been slain  [by Me],  be a token cause and win glory',  this is by way of answering to what Arjuna has said earlier viz.,  'We do not know who, amongst both of us,  is more powerful than the other etc.  (11.II, 6)'.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tasmat, therefore; tvam, you; uttistha, rise up; (and) labhasva, gain; the yasah, fame, that Arjuna has conered the Atirathas [Atiratha-see note under 1.4.6.-Tr.], Bhisma, Drona and others, who are unconerable even by the gods. Such fame can be acired only by virtuous actions. Jitva, by defeating; satrun, the enemies, Duryodhana and others; bhunksva, enjoy; a rajyam, kingdom; that is samrddham, propersous, free from enemies and obstacles. Ete, these; nihatah, have been definitely killed, made lifeless; eva maya, verily by Me; eva purvam, even earlier. Bhava, be you; nimitta-matram, merely an instrument, O Savyasachin. Arjuna was called so because he could shoot arrows even with his left hand.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Therefore rise up, and be a mere instrument.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Since it is so, and because even without your effort these enemies are destined to perish, therefore rise up, i.e., become ready for battle. Obtain such fame as 'The great warriors like Bhishma, Drona, and others, who are unconquerable even by the gods, were swiftly defeated by Arjuna.' For fame is indeed attained only through great meritorious deeds. And by defeating the enemies like Duryodhana and others completely, enjoy a prosperous and obstacle-free kingdom. And these enemies of yours have already been slain, their lifespans cut short, by Me alone in the form of Time, even before your battle. They were not cast down from their chariots solely to allow you to win the fame. Therefore, be you a mere instrument, becoming the object of the world-wide statement: 'These were defeated by Arjuna.' O Savyasachin (ambidextrous archer), for you, who have the habit of shooting arrows even with the left hand, the victory over Bhishma, Drona, and others is not impossible. Therefore, when they are cast down from their chariots by Me following your action, people will attribute the agency of killing to you alone. This is the meaning.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Therefore. Since it is so, therefore rise up for battle. Obtain, i.e., attain, such fame that 'Bhishma, Drona, and others, who are difficult to conquer even by the gods, were defeated by Arjuna.' Defeating the enemies without effort, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. And these enemies of yours have already been virtually destroyed even before your battle by Me alone in the form of Time; nevertheless, you be a mere instrument. O Savyasachin (ambidextrous archer) — by the etymology 'one who has the habit of shooting arrows with the left hand', he who shoots arrows even with the left hand is called Savyasachi.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Since even without you these enemies will cease to exist, therefore rise up, stand and fight. If you ask, 'If the task is accomplished even without me, why do You engage me in battle?', He says this with the intention of proclaiming your fame. 'Obtain fame' — attain fame generated by merit born of My worship etc., namely, 'Bhishma and other great warriors, who cannot be conquered even by the gods, were defeated by Arjuna.' Conquering the enemies like Duryodhana and others, enjoy a prosperous, rival-free, and obstacle-free kingdom. He says the following with the intention that there is no effort on your part in defeating them. 'These enemies of yours have already been killed by Me alone with certainty.' If you ask, 'Then how are they still standing alive?', He says the following with the intention of making you an instrument to grant you fame: 'You be a mere instrument.' 'O Savyasachin' — addressing him thus as one who has the habit of shooting arrows even with the left hand. He indicates: 'Become a mere instrument and make your name Savyasachi meaningful'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
If you ask, 'If even without my effort the sons of Dhritarashtra and others will not survive, then why do You urge me to fight?', the answer is this verse beginning with 'tasmāt tvam'. The intent of the resolution is: 'Urging you to fight is for the sake of obtaining victory, fame, kingdom, etc., for you, My devotee.' 'Conquering the enemies' is the common cause for both fame and kingdom. To show the reason for wishing to kill them, while avoiding the faults of partiality and cruelty, it is said that they have committed offenses (or are sinners). Now, the statement 'they are already killed' is contrary to perception, and if so, urging him 'to be a mere instrument in killing them' is useless; to this, Ramanuja explains: 'they are appointed for destruction (destined for killing).' Appointment for killing means the resolve to that effect; it means they are resolved by the Lord as fit to be killed. Since the resolve of the Lord is unfailing and its fruit is inseparable, they are described as 'slain' (in the past tense). Even so, the past-participle (nistha) is appropriate, because in the sequence of actions starting from the Lord's resolve up to the final result, the resolve portion has already been accomplished, and it is justifiable to use a word denoting the whole for a part, just as the word 'cooks' is used for each individual action like placing the pot, arranging the firewood, etc. Some say that here the past-participle suffix 'kta' is used in the sense of hope or the beginning of an action. In 'nimittamātram' (mere instrument), there seems to be a denial of material causality; since there is no possibility of that here, such a denial is also inappropriate. To this, he explains: 'of those being killed by Me.' The idea is that you, who are made an instrument by Me and have that understanding, should not entertain doubts regarding sin, cruelty, defeat, etc. The word 'mātra' (mere) is for the exclusion of primary agency, with this intent he says: 'occupying the position of a weapon, etc.' The address by the word 'Savyasācī' is for showing the extraordinary excellence suited for battle; with this intent he derives it from the root 'sac' meaning 'fastening/joining'. He shows the instrumental sense of the word 'savya', the specific action of the root suited to the context, and the habit-denoting sense of the suffix, by saying 'with the left'. Here, 'joining' (samavāya) means aiming the arrow. Removing the doubt that, by the rule of exclusion, he is unable to aim the arrow with the right hand, and also providing the contextually appropriate noun for the word 'savya' which can otherwise mean leg etc., he says: 'even with the left hand'. The mention of 'left' is for the exclusion of non-association (i.e. he can definitely use the left hand too), not for the exclusion of other associations (i.e. it does not mean he cannot use the right hand). That is the idea. He states the result: 'with both hands.' The word 'capable' implies: 'Such capability was ordained by Me in you for the purpose of removing the burden of the earth'.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Therefore, obtain fame without effort; He says 'tasmāt' (therefore). O Savyasachin — you who have the habit of aiming arrows even with your left hand, rise up, become ready for battle. Obtain fame — such fame as 'all were killed by his left hand alone' and so on. Conquering the enemies like Duryodhana and others, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. These have already been slain by Me even before your killing them; therefore, be a mere instrument so that people may say: 'all were killed by Arjuna'.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Therefore. Since even without you these enemies will die, therefore rise up for battle. The rest is clear.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Therefore get up. Prepare to fight and win glory. Conquer your enemies and enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by My arrangement, and you, O Savyasācī, can be but an instrument in the fight.

 Savya-sācin refers to one who can shoot arrows very expertly in the field; thus Arjuna is addressed as an expert warrior capable of delivering arrows to kill his enemies. “Just become an instrument”: nimitta-mātram. This word is also very significant. The whole world is moving according to the plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Foolish persons who do not have sufficient knowledge think that nature is moving without a plan and all manifestations are but accidental formations. There are many so-called scientists who suggest that perhaps it was like this, or maybe like that, but there is no question of “perhaps” and “maybe.” There is a specific plan being carried out in this material world. What is this plan? This cosmic manifestation is a chance for the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead, back to home. As long as they have the domineering mentality which makes them try to lord it over material nature, they are conditioned. But anyone who can understand the plan of the Supreme Lord and cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness is most intelligent. The creation and destruction of the cosmic manifestation are under the superior guidance of God. Thus the Battle of Kurukṣetra was fought according to the plan of God. Arjuna was refusing to fight, but he was told that he should fight in accordance with the desire of the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy. If one is in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness and his life is devoted to the Lord’s transcendental service, he is perfect.