Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
vedāvināśinaṃ nityaṃ ya enamajamavyayam .
kathaṃ sa puruṣaḥ pārtha kaṃ ghātayati hanti kam

Word Meanings:
वेद - knows
अविनाशिनम् - indestructible
नित्यम् - eternal
यः - who
एनम् - this
अजम् - unborn
अव्ययम् - inexhaustible
कथम् - how
सः - he
पुरुषः - man
पार्थ - O Partha
कम् - whom
घातयति - causes to be slain
हन्ति - kills
कम् - whom.

Life Application:
Anchor your understanding in eternal truths so that temporary fears no longer drive your actions.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
O Partha, how can the man who knows this Self to be indestructible, eternal, unborn and imperishable, cause anyone to be slain, or how can he slay anyone?

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Whosoever knows It to be indestructible, eternal, unborn and inexhaustible, how can that man slay, O Arjuna, or cause to be slain?

वेद knows? अविनाशिनम् indestructible? नित्यम् eternal? यः who? एनम् this (Self)? अजम् unborn? अव्ययम् inexhaustible? कथम् how? सः he (that)? पुरुषः man? पार्थ O Partha (son of Pritha)? कम् whom? घातयति causes to be slain? हन्ति kills? कम् whom.Commentary The enlightened sage who knows the immutable and indestructible Self through direct cognition or spiritual Anubhava (experience) cannot do the act of slaying. He cannot cause another to slay also.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
He who knows the Spirit as Indestructible, Immortal, Unborn, Always-the-Same, how should he kill or cause to be killed?

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
No descriptive definition of the Self can be given, but it can be indicated through words like eternal, indestructible and the like. Here, through a rhetorical question, this verse confirms the very principle established in the earlier verses -- that the person who knows the indestructible Self never becomes overwhelmed with grief in facing the realities of life.

Having known the Self's imperishable, indestructible, unborn and eternal nature, what person would impose agency upon himself? The Lord says that such a person neither kills anyone nor becomes the cause of anyone's death. It should be noted here that this statement applies both to the Lord Himself and to Arjuna. If Arjuna himself grasps this truth, there remains no question of his considering himself the slayer of the unborn Self.

How is the Self indestructible? This is clarified in the next verse through an illustration.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Whosever realises This to be changeless, destructionless, unborn and immutable, how can that person be slain; how can he either slay [any one] ?  O son of Prtha !

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
He who knows this (self) to be indestructible, unborn, unchanging and hence eternal - how and whom, O Arjuna, does he cause to be killed, and whom he kill?

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
O Partha, he who knows this One as indestructible, eternal, birthless and undecaying, how and whom does that person kill, or whom does he cause to be killed! [This is not a estion but only an emphatic denial.-Tr.]

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Hence, how could one who knows in this way cause anyone to be slain, or slay anyone? 'Avinashi' (indestructible) means free of incidental destruction. 'Nitya' (eternal) means free of natural destruction. Or, 'avinashi' means free of association with fault, and 'nitya' means ever-existing -- this distinction should be applied everywhere, since the word 'destroyed' is used properly only of a faulty person and the like.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Anticipating the objection that this verse seems to merely repeat the meaning of the preceding one, he brings down the next verse with a preliminary restatement of the topic. Owing to the opposition of the notion of agency and the rest, and by the capacity of the ascertainment of the non-dual, unchanging Self, he grants permission for the renunciation befitting the learned, for the maturation of knowledge. Though the repetition of 'avinashinam' and 'nityam' was already resolved earlier, here a further, different account of their non-repetitiveness is given. Here the words 'kim' and 'katham,' though a genuine question is conceivable, are to be construed in the sense of denial, since no answering statement follows.

The intended sense of this section is: unmodifiability alone is the reason, and it applies equally to the denial of all action for the man of knowledge. If the denial of all action is indeed intended for the knower, why then is objection raised specifically regarding the meaning of 'to slay'? To this it is said: though the knower's own nature might seem to differ from that of Brahman, the object of knowledge, owing to their apparently opposed properties -- as fire differs from ice -- non-duality alone is, in truth, real; and it is precisely the impossibility of both agency and objecthood in the knower endowed with this very knowledge of non-duality that is the purpose of this verse. The remainder is to be understood in keeping with the preceding verses.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
O descendant of Pritha, the man who knows this embodied one to be indestructible, eternal, birthless and imperishable -- how can he slay anyone, and how can he cause anyone to be slain?

Explanation -- 'Veda avinashinam...ghatayati hanti kam' -- one who truly understands that this embodied one never undergoes destruction, never undergoes any change, is never born, and never suffers any diminishment of any kind -- how can such a person slay anyone, or cause anyone to be slain? That is, such a person's inclination cannot be directed toward killing or causing to kill others. He can be neither the agent nor the instigator of any such action.

Here the Lord, by calling the embodied one indestructible, eternal, unborn and imperishable, has denied all six modifications in it -- by 'indestructible,' the modification of death; by 'eternal,' the modification of change of state and growth; by 'unborn,' both the modification of birth and the resultant modification of existence-after-birth; and by 'imperishable,' the modification of decay. No action whatsoever can produce even the slightest modification in the embodied one.

If the Lord were to be asked...

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
He who knows the self to be eternal, as It is indestructible, unborn and changeless - how can that person be said to cause the death of the self, be it of the self existing in the bodies of gods or animals or immovables?  Whom does he kill?  The meaning is - how can he destroy any one or cause anyone to slay?  How does he become an instrument for slaying?  The meaning is this:  the feeling of sorrow:  'I cause the slaying of these selves, I slay these,' has its basis solely in ignorance about the true nature of the self.

Let it be granted that what is done is only separation of the bodies from the eternal selves. Even then, when the bodies, which are instruments for the experience of agreeable pleasures, perish, there still exists reason for sorrow in their separation from the bodies. To this (Sri Krsna) replies:

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
'Veda...' Whosoever, through his own realization, understands this Self as 'this neither slays anyone, nor is this slain by anyone' -- how could there be any bondage for him?

He clarifies this same point, in 'na jayate...' This Self will not come to be by 'not having been'; rather, it will simply continue to be, having always been. Hence it is neither born nor does it die, since, having been, it will never cease to be, but will simply continue to be.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Having declared, by the mantra 'he who thinks of this One as the killer,' that the Self does not become the agent or object of the act of killing, and having stated, by the mantra 'never is this One born,' the reasons for its changelessness, the Lord now sums up the purport of what was declared: he who knows this One -- possessed of the characteristics stated in the earlier mantra -- as indestructible (free of the final modification, death), eternal (free of modifications such as weakness from disease), unborn (birthless), and undecaying (free of the modification of decay) -- how does that knowing, authoritative person kill, or cause to be killed? That is, he can neither undertake the act of killing, nor appoint another as slayer. Here the words 'kim' (how/what) and 'katham' (how) convey not a question but an objection, since a genuine question makes no sense here. The reason given -- changelessness -- applies equally to the denial of all action; hence the Lord's intent, as the purport of this section, is that all action whatsoever is denied for the man of knowledge.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
'Veda avinashinam...' Why is the Self's indestructibility and the rest stated yet again? He states the purport, in 'atah...' By the reasons already given, one who thus knows the Self as indestructible and so forth forms no notion of how he might cause anyone to be slain or slay anyone -- this is the sense. It was earlier said that one who considers the soul impermanent and the like does not know; now it is said that the knower holds no such view. One might object that 'avinashinam' and 'nityam' are repetitive; to this he states the difference in their meanings, in 'avinashinam...': 'naimittika' (incidental) destruction is that occasioned by causes such as the destruction of the reflected image; 'svabhavika' (natural) destruction is that brought about by time. By 'free of association with fault,' what was said in the verse on sense-contact -- that the Self's suffering and the like is merely a product of false identification, not its own inherent property -- is here restated.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
He states the fruit that arises from knowledge of the unmodified Self, in 'veda avinashinam...' 'Katham' (how) denies the manner itself. 'Whom does he slay' denies both objecthood and agency; 'causes to be slain' denies instigation.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Having declared 'this neither slays nor is slain,' the part 'is not slain' has been established; now, establishing 'does not slay,' he sums up. That whose nature is not to perish is 'avinashi' (indestructible), that is, free of the final modification. The reason for this is 'avyaya' -- that whose diminishment, whether of parts or of qualities, does not exist. Destruction is observed only through diminishment of parts or of qualities; hence, being free of both, its destruction is impossible -- this is the sense.

One might object that, being born, its destructibility would be inferred; to this he answers with 'aja' (unborn). This is not born, hence it is 'aja' -- free of the initial modification. The reason for this is 'nitya,' ever-existing -- since birth is observed only of what did not previously exist, not of what is ever-existing, is the intent. Or, 'avinashi' means unsublatable, real; 'nitya' means all-pervading. The reason for this is 'aja' and 'avyaya' -- free of birth and destruction, since all-pervasiveness and reality are both impossible for what is born and destroyed.

Thus, one who directly realizes, through scripture and the teacher's instruction, this present embodied Self, free of every modification -- 'I am free of all modification, the illuminator of all, free of all duality, of the nature of realization of supreme bliss' -- that knowing person, of complete nature, whom does he slay, how does he slay? The word 'kim' (how) is used in the sense of objection. He slays no one, in no way whatsoever -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
For this very reason, the absence of agency in slaying, already stated earlier, is well established, he says, in 'veda...': 'nitya,' free of growth; 'avyaya,' free of decay; 'aja,' indestructible -- one who knows these, how or whom does such a person slay? For one such as this, there is no means of being slain at all. Nor, becoming an instigator himself, does he cause another to slay whom? No one, in no way whatsoever -- this is the sense. By this it is also conveyed: since I too would be an instigator, do not regard me with a faultfinding eye.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Having established, through the mantra 'never is this One born,' which states the Self's freedom from modification, the claim made in the mantra 'this neither slays, nor is slain,' he now sums up this very point himself, in 'veda...' By this, having declared 'it neither slays nor is slain,' the part 'is not slain' was established; now 'does not slay' is established. Why is this Self neither the agent nor the object of the act of slaying? Because it is unmodified -- this was stated by the second mantra.

One who knows this Self, possessed of the nature stated in the earlier mantra -- indestructible (free of the final modification), eternal (unchanging), undecaying (free of decay, the reason for which is that, being unborn, it is free of all modification) -- that unmodified, Self-realized, knowing person, whom does he cause to be slain, that is, whom does he appoint as slayer? And whom does he slay? No one, in no way whatsoever -- this is the sense. In the same way, you too, becoming a knower, should not impute to yourself the agency of slaying, nor the role of instigating Shikhandi and the rest -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Pointing to the contrary view stated in the verse 'ya enam...' (2.19), the verse 'veda...' is spoken -- 'nityam' restates what was already established as the thesis. The words 'avinashinam' and the rest serve as the reason for this, is the intent. Here the word 'vyaya' refers to modifications other than birth and death, that is, decay or the separation of parts susceptible to cutting and the like. The word 'kam' (whom), requiring reference to various unspecified individuals, indicates 'gods, humans' and so forth. Anticipating an objection of redundancy between 'ghatayati' (causes to be slain) and 'hanti' (slays), he states the meaning according to the order intended, in 'how does he destroy' and the rest.

One might object that the denial of agency in slaying specifically for the knower is not proper, since, given the Self's eternality, slaying is impossible even for the non-knower -- to address this doubt, stating the resulting sense, he connects it to the present topic, in 'etan...' In this verse, it is not merely agency in slaying that is denied, but also the grief that arises from it, precisely through denying the manner that produces it -- this is the purpose of the word 'katham' (how) here, is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Moreover, it is ignorance alone that is the cause of the notion of fault in slaying this Self, he says: 'veda avinashinam...' He who thus knows that this Self is indestructible (free of any particular modification), eternal (ever the same), unborn (free of birth and the rest, having been made so by Me alone for the sake of My play), and undecaying (free of destruction and the like) -- by what means, becoming an instigator himself, does that person cause anyone to be slain by another? No one at all -- this is the sense. And whom does he himself slay? No one at all -- this is the sense.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He now establishes 'this does not slay,' in 'veda...' That whose nature is to perish, to disappear, is 'destructible' -- like the snake mistaken for a rope, the three limiting adjuncts called gross, subtle, and causal are of this nature; distinct from these is the 'indestructible.' Hence this is 'eternal,' free of destruction. The reason for this is 'unborn' -- only what is born is impermanent, but this, being unborn, is eternal -- this is the sense.

One might object that even a perishable thing can be eternal relative to its own effects, as is seen in the Sankhya-accepted Pradhana (primordial nature) and the logician-accepted space -- to this he answers with 'avyaya' (imperishable). That which does not abandon its prior state is 'avyaya,' unchanging. Pradhana, however, by the maxim 'it is ever in flux, being the activity of the gunas,' is held to be ever-transforming even in the state of equilibrium of the gunas. Space too, since its origination is heard of in the scripture 'from that Self, space arose,' lacks imperishability precisely because it lacks unbornness.

One who directly realizes such a Self -- how, in what manner, would such a person impel another toward the act of slaying? Or whom would he slay? In no way whatsoever does he cause anyone to be slain, nor does he slay -- this is the sense, since duality is absent.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
O Pārtha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible, eternal, unborn and immutable kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?

 Everything has its proper utility, and a man who is situated in complete knowledge knows how and where to apply a thing for its proper utility. Similarly, violence also has its utility, and how to apply violence rests with the person in knowledge. Although the justice of the peace awards capital punishment to a person condemned for murder, the justice of the peace cannot be blamed, because he orders violence to another person according to the codes of justice. In Manu-saṁhitā, the lawbook for mankind, it is supported that a murderer should be condemned to death so that in his next life he will not have to suffer for the great sin he has committed. Therefore, the king’s punishment of hanging a murderer is actually beneficial. Similarly, when Kṛṣṇa orders fighting, it must be concluded that violence is for supreme justice, and thus Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well that such violence, committed in the act of fighting for Kṛṣṇa, is not violence at all because, at any rate, the man, or rather the soul, cannot be killed; so for the administration of justice, so-called violence is permitted. A surgical operation is not meant to kill the patient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be executed by Arjuna at the instruction of Kṛṣṇa is with full knowledge, so there is no possibility of sinful reaction.