Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
śamo damastapaḥ śaucaṃ kṣāntirārjavameva ca .
jñānaṃ vijñānamāstikyaṃ brahmakarma svabhāvajam

Word Meanings:
शमः - serenity
दमः - selfrestraint
तपः - austerity
शौचम् - purity
क्षान्तिः - forgiveness
आर्जवम् - uprightness
एव - even
च - and
ज्ञानम् - knowledge
विज्ञानम् - realisation
आस्तिक्यम् - belief in God
ब्रह्मकर्म - the duties of Brahmanas
स्वभावजम् - born of nature.

Life Application:
Serenity, self-control, austerity, purity, forgiveness, honesty, knowledge, wisdom, faith—natural duties of a scholar/teacher.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Serenity, self-restraint, austerity, purity, forgiveness, uprightness, knowledge, wisdom and faith in God — these are the duties of the Brahmanas, born of their own nature.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Serenity, self-restraint, austerity, purity, forgiveness and also uprightness, knowledge, realisation and belief in God are the duties of the Brahmanas, born of (their own) nature.

शमः serenity? दमः selfrestraint? तपः austerity? शौचम् purity? क्षान्तिः forgiveness? आर्जवम् uprightness? एव even? च and? ज्ञानम् knowledge? विज्ञानम् realisation? आस्तिक्यम् belief in God? ब्रह्मकर्म (are) the duties of Brahmanas? स्वभावजम् born of nature.Commentary Sama is control of the mind. Dama is control of the senses. Serenity and selfrestraint have already been explained in XVII.2. Austerity of the three kinds has also been explained in XVII.14 to 16.Astikyam Faith in the words of the Guru? in the teachings of the scriptures? in the existence of God? in the life beyond or hereafter and in ones own Self.The mind is absorbed in the Self. This gives peace. Selfrestraint is the helpmate of peace. In obeying the inunctions of the scriptures alone you will attain peace and spiritual progress. You must not argue too much. You must have reverence for and faith in the teaching.As the sandalwood tree is fragrant with its own sweet scent? as a Champaka tree is adorned by its lovely flowers? so also a Brahmana is adorned by these nine virtues which are inseparable from him.Now? O Arjuna? listen to the duties of a Kshatriya.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Serenity, self-restraint, austerity, purity, forgiveness, as well as uprightness, knowledge, wisdom and faith in God - these constitute the duty of a spiritual Teacher.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
This verse lists the duties of a Sattva-predominant Brahmana. Although the word 'karma' (action) is used, the list contains internal virtues that a Brahmana must cultivate until they become natural to him. Peacefulness (control of the mind), self-restraint (control of the senses), austerity (conserving energy), purity (external and internal cleanliness), forgiveness (lack of hatred), and honesty (straightforwardness). The intellectual and spiritual aspect includes jnana (theoretical knowledge of scriptures), vijnana (direct, subjective realization of truth), and astikya (deep conviction and faith in scriptures).

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Quietude, self-control, as well as purity, for-bearance, and also straightforwardness, knowledge, wisdom, and faith in another world are the duties of the Brahmanas, born of their nature.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Control of the senses and the mind, austerity, purity, forbearance, uprightness, knowledge, special knowledge, and faith - all these constitute the duty of Brahmana born of his inherent nature.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The natural duties of the Brahmanas are the control of the internal and external organs, austerity, purity, forgiveness, straightforwardness, knowledge as also wisdom [Knowledge refers to the understanding of subjects presented by the scriptures; wisdom means making them matters of one's own experience.] and faith.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
'Sama' is tranquillity of the mind; 'Dama' is control of the external senses; 'Tapas' is bodily and other austerities; 'Sauca' is both internal and external purity; 'Ksanti' is preserving composure when insulted; 'Jnana' is study of scriptures; 'Vijnana' is experiential understanding of them.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Control of the mind, control of the senses, enduring hardships for duty, external and internal purity, forgiving others' offenses, simplicity of body and mind, knowledge of scriptures, experiential understanding of rituals/truths, and faith in God and scriptures — these are all the natural duties of a Brahmana.

Commentary: These nine qualities are natural to a Brahmana due to the dominance of Sattva-guna, pure lineage, and past impressions. While these qualities can be cultivated by anyone, they are easiest for a Brahmana. In the Gita, livelihood activities are not listed for a Brahmana; instead, these internal virtues are highlighted as their natural work.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Sama' is the control of the external sense-organs. 'Dama' is the control of the mind. 'Tapas' is the chastisement of the body by controlling enjoyments, as enjoined by the Sastras. 'Sauca' is fitness for performing acts as enjoined by the Sastras. 'Ksanti' is preserving the composure of the mind, though injured by others. 'Arjava' is straightforwardness expressing itself in correct outward manifestation to others in consonance with one's own mind. 'Jnana' is knowledge about the real nature of the higher and lower truths. 'Vijnana' is the knowledge pertaining to exceptional attributes belonging to the Supreme Reality. 'Astikya' or faith is firm conviction in the truth of all things enjoined in the Vedas. The meaning is that it is unshakable by any reason whatever.

'Astikya' is positive conviction in the truth to the following effect:  (1) The Lord Vasudeva, the Supreme Person, is signified by the term, Supreme Brahman. (2) He is devoid of even the slightest trace or evil. (3) He possesses countless hosts of auspicious and excellent attributes such as knowledge, strength etc., boundless and natural. (4) To reveal His nature is the sole purpose of the whole of Vedas and the Vedanta and He can be known only through them. (5) He is the sole cause of the universe (6) He is the foundation of the entire universe. (7) He is the actuator of all. (8) All actions taught in the Vedas form His worship. (9) When worshipped through them, He confers fruits known as Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa.

That such is the meaning has been declared in the following text:  'Indeed I am to be known from all the Vedas' (15.15); 'I am the origin of all; from Me proced everything' (10.8), 'All this is strung on Me' (7.7), 'Knowing me as the enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities ৷৷. he attains peace' (10.29), There is nothing greater than myself, Arjuna (7.7) 'He from whom proceeds the activity of all beings and by whom all this is pervaded - by worshipping Him with his duty, will a man reach perfection' (18.46); and 'He who knows Me as unborn, without a beginning and the great Lord of the worlds ৷৷.' (10.3)

Such are the duties of the Brahmana arising from his inherent nature.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Svabhavajam brahma-karma, the natural duties of the Brhamanas, of the Brahmana caste; are samah, control of the internal organs; damah, control of the external organs-these bear the meanings as explained earlier (see 6.3, 10.4, 16.1); tapah, austerity-bodily austerity, as explained before (17.14); saucam, purity, as already explained (in 13.7, 16.3); ksantih, forgiveness; arjavam, straightforwardness, simplicity; jnanam, knowledge; eva ca, as also vijnanam, wisdom; astikyam, faith, the idea of truth [Truth of the scritpures, existence of God, etc. In place of asti-bhavah Ast reads astika-bhavah, the feeling of conviction with regard to the existence of God and the other world. Tr.] respect for the teaching of the scriptures. By svabhavajam (natural) is conveyed the very same idea as was expressed in 'classified according to the gunas born from Nature' (41).

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The natural duties of a Brahmana are serenity etc. 'Jnana' refers to the study of Vedas, and 'Vijnana' is the realization of the Supreme Self.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Control of mind and senses, austerity, internal and external purity, patience under injury, straightforwardness, scriptural knowledge, experiential wisdom (both ritual skill and self-realization), and faith in scripture and God — these nine constitute the natural work of a Brahmana born of Sattva-guna.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Serenity (control of mind), self-restraint (control of senses), austerity, purity, forgiveness, straightforwardness, scriptural knowledge, experiential realization, and faith in the hereafter — these are the natural duties of a Brahmana.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The natural duties of a Brahmana born of Sattva-guna are control of mind and senses, physical/mental austerity, internal/external purity, forbearance, simplicity, knowledge of scriptural truths, experiential wisdom, and faith.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
These qualities are repeated to show they must be practiced as duties. 'Astikya' is faith in the entire Vedic meaning, especially that Lord Vasudeva is the Supreme Brahman, the sole cause and supporter of the universe.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The natural duties of a Brahmana are serenity (mind absorbed in Me), self-control (restraining senses), bodily austerity, purity, forgiveness, straightforwardness, scriptural knowledge, realization, and conviction in the fruits of scriptures.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Serenity, self-restraint, austerity, purity (external and internal), forgiveness, straightforwardness, scriptural knowledge, experiential realization, and faith — these nine are the natural duties of a Brahmana.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, knowledge, wisdom and religiousness – these are the natural qualities by which the brāhmaṇas work.

There is no purport for this verse