Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
anudvegakaraṃ vākyaṃ satyaṃ priyahitaṃ ca yat .
svādhyāyābhyasanaṃ caiva vāṅmayaṃ tapa ucyate

Word Meanings:
अनुद्वेगकरम् - causing no excitement
वाक्यम् - speech
सत्यम् - truthful
प्रियहितम् - pleasant and beneficial
च - and
यत् - which
स्वाध्यायाभ्यसनम् - regular study of scriptures (svadhyaya)
च - and
एव - also
वाङ्मयम् - of speech
तपः - austerity
उच्यते - is called.
सत्यं ब्रूयात् - speak truth that is pleasant

Life Application:
Words causing no excitement, truthful, pleasant, beneficial, and regular scriptural study—called vocal austerity.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Speech which causes no excitement, truthful, pleasant and beneficial, and the practice of the study of the scriptures, are called austerity of speech.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Speech which causes no excitement, truthful, pleasant and beneficial, the practice of the study of the Vedas, are called austerity of speech.

अनुद्वेगकरम् causing no excitement? वाक्यम् speech? सत्यम् truthful? प्रियहितम् pleasant and beneficial? च and? यत् which? स्वाध्यायाभ्यसनम् the practice of the study of the Vedas? च and? एव also? वाङ्मयम् of speech? तपः austerity? उच्यते is called.Commentary The words of the man who practises the austerity of speech cannot cause pain to others. His words will bring cheer and solace to others. His words prove beneficial to all. The organ of speech causes great distraction of mind. Control of speech is a difficult discipline but you will have to practise it if you want to attain supreme peace. Nothing is impossible for a man who has a firm determination? sincerity of purpose? iron will? patience and perseverance.It is said in Manu Smritiसत्यं ब्रूयात् प्रियं ब्रूयात् न ब्रूयात् सत्यमप्रियम्।प्रियं च नानृतं ब्रूयात् एष धर्मः सनातनः।।One should speak what is true one should speak what is pleasant. One should not speak what is true if it is not pleasant nor what is pleasant if it is false. This is the ancient Dharma.Excitement Pain to living beings.Speech? to be an austerity? must form an invariable combination of all the four attributes mentioned in this verse? viz.? nonexciting or nonpainful? truthful? pleasant and beneficial if it is wanting in one or the other of these attributes? it cannot form the austerity of speech. Speech may be pleasant but it it is lacking in the other three attributes? it will no longer be an austerity of speech.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Speech that hurts no one, that is true, is pleasant to listen to and beneficial, and the constant study of the scriptures - this is austerity in speech.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Speech is a powerful medium of self-expression. Austerity of speech does not mean silent self-mortification, but rather speaking words that are non-agitating, truthful, pleasant, and beneficial. Regular study (Svadhyaya) and contemplation of the scriptures redirect the energy saved by avoiding gossip and harsh speech into spiritual growth.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
The unoffending speech which is true, and which is pleasant and beneficial;  and also the practice of regular recitation of the Vedas - all this is said to be an austerity by the speech-sense.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Speech that causes no shock (hurt and fear etc.) and which is true, pleasant and beneficial, and also the practice of recitation of the scriptures are called the austerity of speech.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
That speech which causes no pain, which is true, agreeable and beneficial; as well as the practice of study of the scriptures,-is said to be austerity of speech.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Sri Anandgiri explains that verbal austerity consists of speaking words that are true, pleasant, beneficial, and cause no anxiety. He illustrates with the example: 'Be calm, my child. Practice study and meditation. This will lead to your welfare.' Regular chanting of the Vedas is also part of it.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Speech that causes no excitement, and which is truthful, pleasant, and beneficial, and the practice of studying the scriptures, is called the austerity of speech.

Commentary: Swami Ramsukhdas explains that 'speech causing no excitement' means words that do not create worry, distress, or mental agitation in others. Truth refers to presenting what was seen, heard, or concluded, free from selfishness. Pleasant speech is devoid of harshness, sarcasm, and insult, while beneficial speech promotes the welfare of all without any malicious intent. Studying holy scriptures like the Gita and chanting the divine name also comprise verbal austerity.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Verbal austerity consists in using words that do not hurt others, are true, are pleasing and are beneficial. It also involves studying scriptural texts.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 17.14–17.16 jointly): Deva - etc.  upto manasam ucyate :  Honesty :  uprightness, i.e.,  the courage regarding what needs no hiding.  Which is true :  This is explained by 'Which is pleasant and beneficial'.  Pleasant : at the time of [hearing]  that speech.  And beneficial :  something in future.  This type of speech, but not merely speaking what actually happened, is called  'speaking the truth'.  Purity of thought :  'Thought'  denotes intention; its highest purity.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yat, that; vakyam, speech; anudvegakaram, which causes no pain, which is not hurtful to creatures which is satyam, true; priya-hitam, agreeable and beneficial with regard to facts seen or unseen-.
'Speech' is alified by characteristics such as being not hurtful, etc. The ca (and) is used for grouping together the alifying characteristics. When a sentence is used in order to make another understand, if it happens to be avoid of one or two or three among the alities-truthfulness, agreeability, beneficialness, and non-hurtfulness-, then it is not austerity of speech.
As in the case of a truthful utterance there would occur a want of austerity of speech if it be lacking in one or two or three of the others, so also in the case of an agreeable utterance there would be no austerity of speech were it ot be without one or two or three of the others; and similarly, there would be no austerity of speech even in a beneficial utterance which is without one or two or three of the others.
What, again, is that austerity (of speech)? That utterance which is true as also not hurtful, and is agreeable and beneficial, is the highest austerity of speech: As for example, the utterance, 'Be calm, my boy. Practise study and yoga. Thery you will gain the highest.'
Svadhyaya-abhyasanam, the practice of the study of scriptures, as is enjoined; ca eva, as well; ucyate, in said to be; tapah, austerity; vanmayam, of speech.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Sri Vallabhacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
Sri Madhusudan Saraswati explains that austerity of speech must contain all four qualities simultaneously: it must not hurt others, must be true, pleasant to hear, and beneficial in its outcome. If it lacks even one quality, it is not verbal austerity. For example: 'Be calm, my child. Study scriptures and practice Yoga; this will bring your welfare.' Regular recitation of Vedas is also included.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Sri Sridhara Swami explains that verbal austerity consists of speech which does not cause fear or distress, is true, is pleasing to the ear, and beneficial in the end. Practice of studying scriptures (Vedas) is also included.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Sri Dhanpati explains that verbal austerity must be free of causing any pain, true (based on facts), pleasant to hear at that moment, and beneficial in its final result. Constant chanting and study of scriptures as prescribed are part of this.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha explains that speech should be free from harshness and backbiting. Truth must be spoken, but it must also be pleasant and lead to human welfare. Constant practice of reciting Vedas is the chanting aspect of this verbal austerity.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Sri Purushottamji states that verbal austerity is speaking truth without greed, which does not cause fear, is pleasing and beneficial for spiritual and temporal life. Reciting Vedas and Smritis is part of this austerity.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Sri Neelkanth explains that 'priyahitam' means sweet to hear at the moment and giving happiness in the long run. Speech must have both qualities to be verbal austerity.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Austerity of speech consists in speaking words that are truthful, pleasing, beneficial, and not agitating to others, and also in regularly reciting Vedic literature.

 One should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others. Of course, when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the instruction of his students, but such a teacher should not speak to those who are not his students if he will agitate their minds. This is penance as far as talking is concerned. Besides that, one should not talk nonsense. The process of speaking in spiritual circles is to say something upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote from scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time, such talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions, one may derive the highest benefit and elevate human society. There is a limitless stock of Vedic literature, and one should study this. This is called penance of speech.