Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
yathā sarvagataṃ saukṣmyādākāśaṃ nopalipyate .
sarvatrāvasthito dehe tathātmā nopalipyate

Word Meanings:
यथा - as
सर्वगतम् - the allpervading
सौक्ष्म्यात् - because of its subtlety
आकाशम् - ether
न - not
उपलिप्यते - is tainted
सर्वत्र - everywhere
अवस्थितः - seated
देहे - in the body
तथा - so
आत्मा - the Self
न - not
उपलिप्यते - is tainted.

Life Application:
Just as all-pervading ether is not tainted due to subtlety, so the Self seated everywhere in the body is untainted.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Just as the all-pervading space is not tainted because of its subtlety, similarly the Self, seated everywhere in the body, is not tainted.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
As the all-pervading ether is not tainted, because of its subtlety, so the Self seated everywhere in the body is not tainted.

यथा as? सर्वगतम् the allpervading? सौक्ष्म्यात् because of its subtlety? आकाशम् ether? न not? उपलिप्यते is tainted? सर्वत्र everywhere? अवस्थितः seated? देहे in the body? तथा so? आत्मा the Self? न not? उपलिप्यते is tainted.Commentary Ether pervades everything. All are immersed in it. There is no point whereunto ether does not penetrate and pervade and yet it is not tainted by anything. Even so the Self pervades the whole body and the whole world. Being subtler than the body the Self is never tainted by it or anything else. It is unattached and actionless. It has no parts or limbs. So virtuous and vicious actions cannot contaminate the Self. It is ever pure and stainless.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
As space, though present everywhere, remains by reason of its subtlety unaffected, so the Self, though present in all forms, retains its purity unalloyed.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Here, the illustration of space (Akasa) is given to show the relationship between Prakriti and Purusha. 'Avakashat Akasa' — that which provides space for objects to dwell in is space. Among the five great elements (Pancha-mahabhutas), this is the subtlest and, for this reason, is all-pervading. The subtle space pervades all the gross objects situated in it, yet none of those objects can limit it or taint it with its defects. The Supreme Self, being the cause of space also, is even subtler than space and pervades it. It pervades all, but nothing can pervade It. Therefore, that Supreme Self, though dwelling in the body, is not tainted by it. The hands of a murderer in a dream cannot smear the awakened man with blood. The blood-stained clothes of a ghost cannot leave their marks on the post. The mirage-water cannot wet the desert sands. All these are examples of delusion (bhrama) and superimposition (adhyasa). This world, being projected due to the ignorance of the Supreme Truth, cannot in any way defile the Supreme Self. Then, what is the function of this Self in the body? Listen:

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Just as the all-pervading Ether is not stained because of its subtleness, in the same fashion the Self, abiding in the body everywhere, is not stained.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
As the all-pervading etther is not tainted because of its subtlety, even so, the self abiding in the body everywhere, is not tainted.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
As the all-pervading space is not defiled, because of its subtlety, similarly the Self, present everywhere in the body [The singular number is used to denote a class, i.e. all bodies. See S.-Tr.], is not defiled.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
'Neither acts nor is tainted'—here, being the seer is stated as the reason for being devoid of the attributes of the seen, by saying 'Moreover' (kiñca). The intended meaning is shown through an illustration in 'ravi...' (sun). Both aspects of the meaning are clarified by 'ravivad' (like the sun).

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Just as the all-pervading space is not tainted anywhere because of its extreme subtlety, similarly the all-permeating Self is not tainted in any body.

Commentary -- [In the previous verse, the Lord denied agency first with the words 'na karoti' (does not act) and then denied experiencing (reaping the fruits of actions) with the words 'na lipyate' (is not tainted). But while discussing both, in this verse He first speaks of the absence of experiencing, and in the next verse He will speak of the absence of agency. Therefore, what is the Lord's purpose in maintaining such an inversion here? The answer to this is that, although experiencing follows agency (i.e. one experiences the fruits of action only after performing the action), yet whatever a man does, he does so by first keeping the goal of some fruit (attainment) in mind. Therefore, experiencing (desire for enjoyment) comes first to the mind, and then he acts accordingly, which means agency follows. From this perspective, the Lord first negates experiencing (taint/attachment) here. Once experiencing (taint) is renounced, the renunciation of agency happens automatically; that is, when the desire for fruits is renounced, even when actions are performed, there is no agency.]yathā sarvagataṃ saukṣmyādākāśaṃ nopalipyate -- The effects of space (ether) are air, fire, water, and earth. Therefore, space is all-pervading in its effects, namely the four elements like air etc., but these four are not all-pervading in space; on the contrary, they are pervaded by it. These four are within space, but space is not within these four. The reason is that compared to space, these four are gross, and space is subtle compared to them. These four are limited and finite, whereas space is limitless and infinite. Modifications (changes) occur in these four elements, but no modification occurs in space.sarvatrāvasthito dehe tathātmā nopalipyate -- Just as space, though existing in the four elements like air etc., is not tainted by them, similarly the Self, though residing everywhere in all bodies, is not tainted in any body. Although the Self is fully present in everyone, It does not mix with anyone. It remains always and in every way completely untainted, because the Self itself is eternal, all-pervading, stable, immovable, ancient, unmanifest, unthinkable, and immutable (Gita 2.24-25), and this entire world is pervaded by this imperishable Self (Gita 2.17).

Relationship -- In the previous verse, the Lord explained the absence of experiencing in the Self; now in the next verse, He explains the absence of agency in the Self.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
As the 'all-pervading ether,' though in contact with all substances, is 'not tainted' by the alities of all these substances, as it is 'subtle' - even so the self, though 'present in all the bodies,' everywhere, namely, in divinities, men etc., is not contaminated by these bodies by reason of Its extreme subtleness.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 13.31–13.34 jointly): Yada etc.  upto na upalipyate.  When  [a man of  Yoga] perceives the mutual difference i.e.,  separateness of all beings  (all mutually different beings) in the very Self  on account of Its all pervasive nature and realises the said difference as having sprung up from the Self alone - even then he does not get any stain.  For [in that case]  he would be the creator  (or performer) of all.  For, he is none but the  Supreme Self; and though residing in the body, he is not stained just as the Eather is  [not stained].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Yatha, as; sarva-gatam, the all-pervading; akasam, space;-though pervasive, still, na upalipyate, is not defiled, does not come into contact; saukmyat, because of its subtlety; tatha, similarly; atma, the Self; avasthitah, present, sarvatra, everywhere; dehe, in the body; na, is not; upalipyate, defiled.
Further,

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatritha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Although, being devoid of qualities (nirguna), the Self does not act, yet how is It not tainted by the nature of the body with which It is eternally united? To answer this, He gives an illustration: 'yatha sarvagatam' (as the all-pervading). Like space, the individual soul (Self), which is the all-supporting pervader, because of its subtlety or minute nature (anutva), is likewise not tainted. Its all-supporting pervasiveness, however, is reasonable only due to the quality of all-pervading consciousness, like sandalwood paste.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Although dwelling in the body, he is not tainted by its actions, because he is himself unattached'—to explain this, He gives an illustration: 'yatha' (as). Due to subtlety, meaning its unattached nature, space, although present everywhere, is not tainted by mud etc. This is the meaning of the illustration. The rest is clear.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
To show an illustration there, He says 'yatha' (as). Just as space, though present everywhere, even in mud etc., is not tainted by mud etc. due to its subtlety or unattached nature, similarly the Self, though residing everywhere in bodies—whether high, middle, or low—is not tainted. The meaning is that it does not become associated with the qualities or defects of the body.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
It was said that due to the absence of agency, the Self is not tainted; to show an illustration of that, He says 'yatha' (as). Just as space, though present everywhere in the body etc., due to its subtlety, meaning its extremely subtle and unattached nature, is not tainted by and does not become associated with the agency etc. residing in the body etc., similarly the Self, abiding everywhere in all bodies, is not tainted by the attributes of the body. This is the meaning.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Non-agency, expressed in 'does not act', has been clarified both in the preceding and succeeding verses. As for the proposition to be established, namely, 'though dwelling in the body, It is not tainted' (13.32), any doubt based on the analogy of wood thrown into a salt mine (where contact transforms the object) is removed by the next verse; to explain this, he says 'Although...'. The feeling is: 'Defects and virtues arise from association; even wet wood is burnt in the company of dry wood (due to fire)' is well known. By the rule that even very pure clothes, ornaments, etc., become unclean by contact with the body even for a moment, how much more so for that which is eternally united with it? With this in mind, he says 'eternally united'. The word 'api' (also/though) is used in both places to show that association does not invariably impose the nature of the associated object upon another, thus demonstrating an exception. The mention of 'dwelling in the body' is also what raises this doubt. The term 'sarvagata' (all-pervading) refers to the possibility of being tainted by the endless, mutually contradictory natures of all the objects with which it is in contact. To indicate that just as space is subtler than the other elements, this Self is even subtler than space, the commentator says 'due to extreme subtlety' (atisaukṣmyāt). By 'tatha' (similarly), the same reason (subtlety) is extended to the Self. Some objects, though not tainted by the nature of certain things when in association, do get tainted by the nature of others; for instance, cotton does not get blackened by the smell of collyrium, but it becomes red by association with lac dye. To dispel the doubt that a similar thing might happen here, the word 'sarva' (all) is used in both the illustration and the illustrated (i.e., 'sarvagatam' and 'sarvatra').

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
To explain this, He gives an illustration: 'yatha' (as). Just as the all-pervading space, which is present everywhere within all inert matter and living beings, due to its subtlety—meaning its lack of material form and attachment—is not tainted by them; similarly, the Self, abiding everywhere in all bodies—whether high or low—is not tainted.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
That 'due to being devoid of qualities, he does not act' is already established. To show that 'due to being unattached, he is not tainted', He says 'yatha' (as). Just as space is not tainted by smoke etc., due to its subtlety, meaning its unattached nature; similarly, the Self is not tainted by merit and sin etc. This is the meaning.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although it is all-pervading. Similarly, the soul situated in Brahman vision does not mix with the body, though situated in that body.

 The air enters into water, mud, stool and whatever else is there; still it does not mix with anything. Similarly, the living entity, even though situated in varieties of bodies, is aloof from them due to his subtle nature. Therefore it is impossible to see with the material eyes how the living entity is in contact with this body and how he is out of it after the destruction of the body. No one in science can ascertain this.