Speaker: Sri Bhagavan

Slok:
kṛṣigaurakṣyavāṇijyaṃ vaiśyakarma svabhāvajam .
paricaryātmakaṃ karma śūdrasyāpi svabhāvajam

Word Meanings:
कृषिगौरक्ष्यवाणिज्यम् - agriculture
वैश्यकर्म - the duties of Vaisya
स्वभावजम् - born of nature
परिचर्यात्मकम् - consisting of service
कर्म - action
शूद्रस्य - of the Sudra
अपि - also
स्वभावजम् - born of nature.

Life Application:
Fulfill your practical work conscientiously, whether in agriculture, trade, business, or supportive service roles.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Agriculture, rearing of cattle and trade are the duties of the Vaisyas, born of their own nature; and service is the duty of the Sudras, born of their own nature.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade are the duties of the Vaisya (merchant), born of (their own) nature; and action consisting of service is the duty of the Sudra (servant-class), born of (their own) nature.

कृषिगौरक्ष्यवाणिज्यम् agriculture? cattlerearing and trade? वैश्यकर्म the duties of Vaisya? स्वभावजम् born of nature? परिचर्यात्मकम् consisting of service? कर्म action? शूद्रस्य of the Sudra? अपि also? स्वभावजम् born of nature.Commentary When a man performs his duties rightly according to his caste and order of life his heart is purified and he goes to heaven. Apastambha Dharma Sutra declares? Men of severla,castes and orders? each devoted to his respective duties? reap the fruits of their actions after death? and then by the residual Karma attain to births in superior Dharma? span of life? learning? conduct? wealth? happiness and intelligence (2?2?2?3). There is a vivid description in the Puranas also of the different results and worlds which men of the four castes and orders obtain by discharging their respective duties.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Agriculture, protection of the cow and trade are the duty of a trader, again in accordance with his nature. The duty of a servant is to serve, and that too agrees with his nature.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Every individual has a specific temperament based on their Gunas. Agriculture, cattle-rearing, and trade are the natural fields of activity for a Vaisya, where they can exhaust their past impressions (Vasanas). Service (paricarya) to society is the natural duty of a Sudra. No caste or work is superior or inferior; every individual contributes to society according to their capacity. Performing one's duties with an attitude of dedication to God leads to spiritual growth and self-development.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Ploughing, cattle-tending and trading are the actions of the Vaisyas, born of  their nature.  The action, in the form of service, is of  the Sudras, born of their nature.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Agriculture, cattle-breeding and trade are the duties of the Vaisya born of his nature৷৷. And the duty of a Sudra is one of service, born of his nature.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
The natural duties of the Vaisyas are agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade. Of the Sudras, too, the natural duty is in the form of service.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhvacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
The duties of the Vaisya and Sudra castes are explained here. Their meanings are straightforward.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Agriculture, protection of cows, and trade are the natural duties of the Vaisyas; and serving all the four classes is the natural duty of the Sudras.

Commentary: Agriculture, breeding and protecting cows (especially cow protection as emphasized by Lord Krishna), and honest trade are natural to Vaisyas. Livelihood should be conducted righteously. Serving the other three classes and facilitating their duties with helper tasks is the natural role of a Sudra. While birth determines one's caste in daily social conduct (marriage, dining), spiritual advancement is accessible to all, determined by devotion and attitude.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
'Agriculture' is cultivation to produce crops. The meaning of 'cattle breeding' is the protection and rearing of cattle. 'Trade' is the activity causing the amassing of wealth through buying and selling. This is the duty of Vaisya born of his inherent nature.

The duty of a Sudra, born of his inherent nature, is service to the three Orders mentioned earlier.

All these have been described to stress that the occupational activities of the four stations are auxiliary to the performance of sacrifices etc., which are ordained by the Sastra. Sacrifices etc., are common to the first three stations. Control of the senses etc., are common to those who, among the first three stations, are anxious for release. As a Brahmana possesses preponderance of Sattva, and as the control of the senses, mind etc., can be performed by him easily and naturally, control of the senses etc., have been prescribed as his duty. As control of the mind, senses etc., can be performed only with difficulty by the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas owing to the preponderance of Rajas and Tamas respectively in them, these have not been stated as their duty. The occupation of a Brahmana is officiating as priest in sacrifices, teaching the Vedas and receiving gifts. The occupation of a Ksatriya is protecting the people and that of the Vaisyas is farming etc., as mentioned before. The duty and occupation of the Sudra is service to the three stations.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta (commenting on verses 18.41–18.60 jointly): Brahmana - etc. upto avasopitat.  Surely the intrinsic nature of the Brahmanas etc., does not voilate what has been  difined (above) by way of classifying their duties.  Therefore, as far as you are concerned, you have the intrinsic ality of the Ksatriya (warrior), and your nature i.e., intrinsic ality, does, without fail, assume the part of the inciter of yourself, even though you don't like it.  For, a person who acts simply being incited by that (natural condition), there is the strong bondage of the merit or demerit. Therefore, perform actions following the means of correct knowledge, taught by Me.  In that case, the bondage would disappear.  The intention of the principal sentence  (statement of the entire passage under study) is to help to get this idea.  The meaning of the subordinate sentences (statements) is evident.
 
Briefly  (verse 50) :  in short.  Knowledge : i.e. the one which has been explained earlier.  Nistha conveys, avoiding verbal jugglary, the meaning  'what has been determined'.  He who is endowed with intellect totally pure etc. :  All this has been almost explained already.  Hence, no more trouble is taken [to comment upon it].

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Svabyavajam, the natural; vaisya-karma, duties of the Vaisyas, of the Vaisya caste; are krsi-gauraksyavanijyam, agriculture, cattle rearing and trade: Krsi is tilling of land. Orre who rears cattle (go) is goraksa; the abstract form of that word is gauraksyam, animal-husbandry. Vanijyam means the occupation of a trader, consisting of buying and selling.
Sudrasya, of the Sudra; api, too; svabhavajam, the natural; karma, duty; is paricaryatmakam, in the form of service.
When rightly pursued, the natural result of these duties enjoined for the castes is the attainment of heaven-which act is evident from such Smrti texts as, 'People belonging to the castes and stages of life, who are true to their own duties, experience after death the fruit of their actions. And after that, as a result of the remnants of their merits they are born in some excellent region, caste and family, with greater piety, longevity, learning, conduct, wealth, happiness and intelligence' (Ap. Dh. Su. 2.2.2.3), etc. And in the Puranas also it is particularly mentioned that poeple belonging to the (different) castes and stages of life come to have specific results in the form of different worlds.
But this result that is going to be stated follows from a different cause:

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
The natural duties of a Vaisya are agriculture, cattle-rearing, and trade. The natural duty of a Sudra is service to the other classes.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
The natural duties of Vaisyas are agriculture, cattle protection, and trade, born of Rajas-guna with subordinate Tamas. The natural duty of Sudras is service, born of Tamas-guna with subordinate Rajas.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
The natural duties of a Vaisya are agriculture, cow protection, and trade. The natural duty of a Sudra is service to others.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
The natural duties of a Vaisya are agriculture, cattle-rearing, and trade. The natural duty of a Sudra is assisting others in their duties.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
Vaisya's duties are agriculture, cattle rearing, and trade. Sudra's duty is service to the three twice-born classes. Cow protection is specifically highlighted as the prime duty of a Vaisya.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
The natural duties of a Vaisya are agriculture, cattle-rearing, and trade. The natural duty of a Sudra is service, assisting the other castes in their activities.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
Agriculture, cattle protection, and trade are the natural duties of Vaisyas; service is the natural duty of Sudras.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
Farming, cow protection and business are the natural work for the vaiśyas, and for the śūdras there are labor and service to others.

There is no purport for this verse