Speaker: Arjuna

Slok:
tasmātpraṇamya praṇidhāya kāyaṃ prasādaye tvāmahamīśamīḍyam .
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuḥ priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva soḍhum

Word Meanings:
तस्मात् - therefore
प्रणम्य - saluting
प्रणिधाय - having bent
कायम् - body
प्रसादये - crave forgiveness
त्वाम् - Thee
अहम् - I
ईशम् - the Lord
ईड्यम् - adorable
पिता - father
प्रियः - beloved
प्रियायाः - to the beloved
अर्हसि - shouldst
देव - O God
सोढुम् - to bear.

Life Application:
Prostrate yourself before the Lord, asking for grace like a father forgiving a son, a friend a friend, a lover a beloved.

Commentary by Swami Tejomayananda:
Therefore, O Lord! Bowing down and prostrating my body completely, I pray to You, the adorable Lord, to be pleased with me. O God! Just as a father forgives the offenses of his son, a friend of his friend, and a lover of his beloved, similarly You too should forgive my offenses.

Commentary by Swami Sivananda:
Therefore, bowing down, prostrating my body, I crave Thy forgiveness, O adorable Lord. As a father forgives his son, a friend his (dear) friend, a lover his beloved, even so shouldst Thou 
forgive me, O God.

तस्मात् therefore? प्रणम्य saluting? प्रणिधाय having bent? कायम् body? प्रसादये crave forgiveness? त्वाम् Thee? अहम् I? ईशम् the Lord? ईड्यम् adorable? पिता father? प्रियः beloved? प्रियायाः to the beloved? अर्हसि (Thou) shouldst? देव O God? सोढुम् to bear.Commentary O Lord? take me to Thy bosom as a mother does her child. Forgive me for all tht I have hitherto spoken or done. Forgive my faults. Please overlook my past mistakes. I have done this through ignorance. Now I have come to Thee in submission. I beg Your pardon now.

Commentary by Shri Purohit Swami:
Therefore I prostrate myself before Thee, O Lord! Most Adorable! I salute Thee, I ask Thy blessing. Only Thou canst be trusted to bear with me, as father to son, as friend to friend, as lover to his beloved.

Commentary by Swami Chinmayananda:
Finding himself in front of the Almighty Lord, Arjuna finds his eloquence and subtle ability to reason fully expressed. Although among Hindus, greeting is done by touching the feet of a revered person, which is a physical act, its real meaning must be experienced as an inner feeling of the heart. Achieving spiritual progress through the surrender of the ego is the real salutation or prostration (saṣṭāṅga praṇipāta). Due to the ego arising from identification with non-self inert limitations (upādhis) and the false imaginations centered around it, we are unable to directly experience the Self residing in our own heart. To the extent that these false notions are destroyed, to that very extent, surely, we can experience the peaceful beauty of the Self, which is our pure nature. In reality, in this surrender of the ego, we are only offering that bundle of our impure animalistic desires (vāsanās), which smells bad due to our foolishness and lust. Therefore, it is natural that when a devotee approaches the feet of the Lord with a sense of devotion and surrender (prapatti), he begs forgiveness for his impurities. Here Arjuna requests the Lord to tolerate his offenses just as a father tolerates those of his son, a friend of his friend, and a lover of his beloved. In these three examples, all those insolent offenses are included which a human being can commit out of ignorance towards his Lord and God. Arjuna prays to the Lord to assume His normal form and to abandon this transcendental, universal, terrifying form.

Commentary by Dr.S.Sankaranarayan:
Hence, paying homage, and prostrating may body,  I solicit grace of You, the Lord praisworthy.  O God !  Be pleased to bear with me, just as a beloved father with his beloved son and just as a dear friend with his dear friend.

Commentary by Swami Adidevananda:
Therefore, bowing down, prostrating the body. I implore Your mercy, O adorable Lord. As a father hears with his son or a friend with his friend, it is meet, O Lord, that You, who are dear to me, should bear with me who am dear to You.

Commentary by Swami Gambirananda:
Therefore, by bowing down and prostrating the body, I seek to propitate You who are God and are adorable. O Lord, You should [The elision of a (in arhasi of priyayarhasi) is a metrical licence.] forgive (my faults) as would a father (the faults) of a son, as a friend, of a friend, and as a lover of a beloved.

Commentary by Sri Madhavacharya:
Sri Madhavacharya did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Anandgiri:
Having made Your unsurpassed power the reason, with the words starting with 'apratima' (peerless) etc., he says, 'I propitiate You by bowing down'—'since...'. After propitiating, he prays for what is to be done by the Lord—'You, however...'. The word 'iva' (as) is supplied from 'as a lover to a beloved'. The sandhi in 'priyāyārhasi' is Vedic (chāndasa). The words 'to forgive the multitude of my offences' are to be supplied as the remainder of the sentence.

Commentary by Swami Ramsukhdas:
Therefore, bowing down and prostrating my body, I seek to please You, the adorable Lord worthy of praise. Just as a father forgives the offenses of his son, a friend of his friend, and a husband of his wife, similarly, O Lord, You are capable of bearing with the offenses committed by me.

Commentary -- 'tasmātpraṇamya praṇidhāya kāyaṃ prasādaye tvāmahamīśamīḍyam' -- You are the Lord of infinite universes. Therefore, You alone are worthy of being praised by all. Your qualities, influence, significance, etc., are infinite; hence, even if sages, great seers, gods, and great souls keep praising You eternally and continuously, they cannot reach the end. What praise can I offer to You who are so worthy of praise? I do not have the strength or capability to praise You. Therefore, I can only perform prostrate obeisance (dandavat pranam) by falling flat at Your feet and seek to please You with this alone.

'piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuḥ priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva soḍhum' -- When someone is insulted, there are three main causes: (1) due to negligence (carelessness), (2) due to not being mindful in laughter, joking, and fun, and (3) due to not knowing the significance of one's companion due to close intimacy. For example, a small child sitting in the lap of his father, out of ignorance, pulls his father's beard and mustache, slaps him on the face, and sometimes kicks him; seeing such actions of the child, the father is only pleased and happy. He does not harbor the feeling that the son is insulting him. A friend acts and speaks in any manner with his friend while walking, sitting, etc., such as -- 'You speak great truth, sir! You are indeed very truthful to your promise! Now you have become a big man! You have started having great pride! Today it seems you have become a king!', but his friend does not mind these words. He only thinks that we are equal friends, and such joking and fun keep happening. Due to mutual love, whatever neglect of the husband occurs by the wife while sitting, talking, etc., the husband tolerates it. For example, if the husband is sitting below, she sits on a higher seat, and sometimes even neglects him in some talk, but the husband tolerates it naturally. Arjuna says that just as a father tolerates the insults of his son, a friend of his friend, and a husband of his wife, that is, forgives them, similarly, O Lord, You are capable of tolerating my insults, i.e., I beg Your forgiveness for this.

In the forty-first and forty-second verses, Arjuna mentioned three things -- 'pramādāt' (due to negligence), 'avahāsārtham' (for the sake of fun), and 'praṇayena' (out of love). Arjuna has indicated those very three things here by giving three illustrations: he gave the illustration of father-son for negligence, friend-friend for fun, and husband-wife for love.

Description of Eleven Rasas in the Eleventh Chapter:
The description of the eleven rasas (aesthetic savors) in the eleventh chapter is as follows:
- Shanta rasa (peaceful) by the description of the divine form;
- Adbhuta rasa (wonder) by the description of the cosmic form pervading from heaven to earth and in all ten directions;
- Raudra rasa (furious) as He is devouring everyone with His tongues and is engaged in destruction in the form of Time;
- Bibhatsa rasa (disgusting) by the description of the terrifying, dreadful mouth and tusks;
- Vira rasa (heroic) in the form of 'stand up for battle';
- Dasya rasa (servitude) by performing prostrate obeisances, etc. (first half of 11.44);
- Karuna rasa (pathetic) by seeing the main warriors and other kings entering the mouth of the Lord (11.28-29);
- Sakhya rasa (friendship), Vatsalya rasa (parental love), and Madhurya rasa (conjugal love) described respectively in the form of a friend bearing with a friend, a father with a son, and a husband with a wife (second half of 11.44);
- Hasya rasa (humor) in the form of remembering laughter, etc. (first half of 11.42).

Connection -- Now in the next two verses, Arjuna prays to see the four-armed form.

Commentary by Sri Ramanuja:
Therefore, bowing down and prostrating, I implore You, O adorable Lord, for Your mercy. Just as, when entreated with salutation, a father will show mercy to his son, or a friend to a friend, even if he has been at fault, even so it is meet that You, most compassionate and dear to me, should bear with me, who is dear to You in all respects.

Commentary by Sri Abhinav Gupta:
Sri Abhinavagupta did not comment upon this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Shankaracharya:
Tasmat, therefore; pranamya, by bowing down; and pranidhaya kayam, prostrating, laying, the body completely down; prasadaye, I seek to propitiate; tvam, You; who are isam, God, the Lord; and are idyam, adorable. Deva, O God; You are Your part, arhasi, should; sodhum, bear with, i.e. forgive (my faults); iva, as would; a pita, father; forgive all the faults putrasya, of a son; and as a sakha, friend; the fautls sakhyuh, of a friend; or as a priyah, lover; forgives the faults priyayah, of a beloved.

Commentary by Sri Jayatritha:
Sri Jayatirtha did not comment on this sloka.

Commentary by Sri Vallabhacharya:
Because it is so, therefore (tasmāt). Bowing down to You, who are the Lord (īśam), the ruler of all, who has assumed the quality of rajas, and who, out of affection for His devotee, is engaged in the duty of a charioteer, I seek to propitiate You. And You should bear with everything, just as a father does for his son, a friend for his friend, and a lover for his beloved.

Commentary by Sri Madhusudan Saraswati:
'Therefore' (tasmāt) means: since it is so, therefore, bowing down (pranamya) meaning saluting You, and prostrating (pranidhaya) meaning bending the body completely down, that is to say, falling flat on the ground like a staff (dandavat), I, the offender, seek to propitiate (prasadaye) You, who are the Lord (isam) and adorable (idyam) i.e., worthy of praise by all. Therefore, O Lord (deva), You should bear with (sodhum) i.e., forgive my offense, just as a father forgives the offense of his son, a friend of his friend, and a lover (husband) of his beloved (devoted wife). The omission of the word 'iva' (like/as) and the sandhi in 'priyāyārhasi' are Vedic (chāndasa), because I have no other refuge.

Commentary by Sri Sridhara Swami:
Since it is so, therefore (tasmāt). Therefore, I propitiate (prasadaye) You, the Lord (īśam) of the universe, who is adorable (īḍyam) i.e. worthy of praise. How? By prostrating my body (kāyaṃ praṇidhāya) i.e. casting it down like a staff (daṇḍavat), and bowing down (praṇamya) i.e. saluting with reverence. Therefore, You should bear with (soḍhum) i.e. forgive my offense. Like whom for whom? Just as a father out of compassion bears with the offense of his son, just as a friend who is an unconditional well-wisher bears with the offense of his friend, and just as a lover (husband) bears with the offense of his beloved (wife) for the sake of her pleasure, similarly You should bear with mine.

Commentary by Sri Dhanpati:
Since it is so, therefore, prostrating the body (kāyam praṇidhāya) meaning bending it down completely, falling flat on the ground like a staff, and bowing down (praṇamya), I seek to propitiate (prasadaye) You. I request Your grace. To show that this is absolutely necessary, he gives two more reasons—You are the Lord (īśam) i.e. the ruler and controller of all, and adorable (īḍyam) i.e. worthy of praise. You are fit to forgive just as a father forgives the offense of his son, as a friend of his friend, and as a husband (priyah) of his wife (priyāyāḥ). You possess fatherhood because You are the creator of the universe; You possess friendship as declared in the Vedic hymn 'two birds, inseparable friends...'; and You possess the status of a husband because You are the nourisher of the entire universe. Therefore, being the supreme father etc., like a father, You must forgive—this is indicated by the three illustrations. The sandhi in 'priyāyārhasi' is Vedic (ārṣa). Furthermore, by addressing Him as 'O God' (deva), he implies: 'This covering of my intellect was created by You alone for the sake of enacting this play in human form'.

Commentary by Vedantadeshikacharya Venkatanatha:
The word 'tasmāt' (therefore) recalls the reason of being the unconditional father, the most worshipful, and the teacher, which was mentioned in the previous verse; with this intention, he says 'yasmāt tvaṃ sarvasya pitā' (since You are the father of all) etc. By 'praṇamya' (bowing down), surrender (prapadana) is expressed. By the word 'tasmāt' which recalls the previously mentioned fatherhood etc., and by the word 'aham' (I), the limbs of surrender like the resolve to be favorable (ānukūlya-saṅkalpa) are indicated. By 'praṇidhāya kāyam' (prostrating the body), the completion of the action by the instruments (body, speech, mind) is indicated, in accordance with the statement 'that which one contemplates with the mind...' (Yajurveda 6.9.7). 'Praṇamya prasādaye' means I bow down in order to propitiate. Explaining what is established by the words 'prasādaye' and 'soḍhum', he shows the similarity between the illustration and the illustrated with the words 'yathā kṛtāparādhasyāpi' (just as for one who has committed an offense) etc.

Commentary by Sri Purushottamji:
Since You alone are the father, teacher, and worshipful lord of all, therefore, for me also, You are everything. Thus, You should forgive my offenses—he requests this with the words 'tasmāt' (therefore) etc. For that reason, I seek to propitiate (prasādaye) You, the Lord (īśam), the master, who is adorable (īḍyam) and praiseworthy, by bowing down (praṇamya) and prostrating my body (kāyaṃ praṇidhāya) i.e. falling flat like a staff. O Lord (deva), adored by the universe, You should forgive (soḍhum) my previously mentioned offenses. Like whom? Just as a father forgives his son, a friend his friend, and a lover (husband) his beloved wife who is worthy of affection.

Commentary by Sri Neelkanth:
He explains the same with 'tasmāt' (therefore) etc. Since You are the father and the teacher, therefore, prostrating my body (kāyam praṇidhāya) i.e. laying it on the ground like a staff and bowing down (praṇamya), I propitiate You. Adorable (īḍyam) means worthy of praise. The rest is clear.

Commentary by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada:
You are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I fall down to offer You my respectful obeisances and ask Your mercy. As a father tolerates the impudence of his son, a friend the impertinence of a friend, or a husband the familiarity of his wife, please tolerate the wrongs I may have done You.

 Kṛṣṇa’s devotees relate to Kṛṣṇa in various relationships; one might treat Kṛṣṇa as a son, or one might treat Kṛṣṇa as a husband, as a friend, or as a master. Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna are related in friendship. As the father tolerates, or the husband or a master tolerates, so Kṛṣṇa tolerates.